

.. _XXII:

Purification by Knowledge and Vision
****************************************



1 I. Change-of-Lineage, Paths, and Fruits
---------------------------------------------



.. _XXII.1:

:ref:`§1 <XXII.1>` *[701/759]*  ``672``  Change-of-lineage knowledge comes next. Its position is to advert to the path, and so it belongs neither to purification by knowledge and vision of the way nor to purification by knowledge and vision, but being intermediate, it is unassignable. Still it is reckoned as insight because it falls in line with insight.

.. _XXII.2:

:ref:`§2 <XXII.2>` Purification by knowledge and vision properly consists in knowledge of the four paths, that is to say, the path of stream-entry, the path of once-return, the path of non-return, and the path of Arahantship.

1.1 The First Path—First Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.3:

:ref:`§3 <XXII.3>` Herein, nothing further needs to be done by one who wants to achieve, firstly, the knowledge of the first path. For what he needs to do has already been done by arousing the insight that ends in conformity knowledge.

.. _XXII.4:

:ref:`§4 <XXII.4>` As soon as conformity knowledge has arisen in him in this way, and the thick murk that hides the truths has been dispelled by the respective force peculiar to each of the three kinds of conformity (see :ref:`XXI.129f. <XXI.129>`), then his consciousness no longer enters into or settles down on or resolves upon any field of formations at all, or clings, cleaves or clutches on to it, but retreats, retracts and recoils as water does from a lotus leaf, and every sign as object, every occurrence as object, appears as an impediment.

.. _XXII.5:

:ref:`§5 <XXII.5>` Then, while every sign and occurrence appears to him as an impediment, when conformity knowledge’s repetition has ended, change-of-lineage knowledge arises in him, which takes as its object the signless, non-occurrence, non-formation, cessation, Nibbāna,—which knowledge passes out of the lineage, the category, the plane, of the ordinary man and enters the lineage, the category, the plane, of the Noble Ones,—which, being the first adverting, the first concern, the first reaction, to Nibbāna as object, fulfils the state of a condition for the path in six ways, as proximity,  ``673``  contiguity, repetition, decisive-support, absence, and disappearance conditions,—which is the culminating peak of insight,—which is irrevocable,—of which it is said:

*[702/760]* “How is it that understanding of emergence and turning away from the external [#1]_  is change-of-lineage knowledge?

“It overcomes arising, thus it is change-of-lineage. It overcomes occurrence … [the sign … accumulation … rebirth-linking … destiny … generation … re-arising … birth … ageing … sickness … death … sorrow … lamentation … ]. It overcomes despair, thus it is change-of-lineage. It overcomes the sign of formations externally, thus it is change-of-lineage.

“It enters into [#2]_  non-arising, thus it is change-of-lineage. It enters into non-occurrence, thus it is change-of-lineage … (etc.) … It enters into non-despair, thus it is change-of-lineage. It enters into cessation, Nibbāna, thus it is change-of-lineage.

“Having overcome arising, it enters into non-arising, thus it is change-of-lineage …” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 56*\  ) and so on, all of which should be quoted.

.. _XXII.6:

:ref:`§6 <XXII.6>` Here is a simile that illustrates how conformity and change-of-lineage occur with different objects though occurring in a single cognitive series with a single adverting. Suppose a man wanted to leap across a broad stream and establish himself on the opposite bank, he would run fast, and seizing a rope fastened to the branch of a tree on the stream’s near bank and hanging down, or a pole, he would leap with his body tending, inclining and leaning towards the opposite bank, and when he had arrived above the opposite bank, he would let go, fall on to the opposite bank, staggering first and then steady himself there; so too this meditator, who wants to establish himself on Nibbāna, the bank opposite to the kinds of becoming, generation, destiny, station, and abode, runs fast by means of the contemplation of rise and fall, etc., and seizing with conformity’s adverting to impermanence, pain or not-self the rope of materiality fastened to the branch of his selfhood and hanging down, or one among the poles beginning with feeling, he leaps with the first conformity consciousness without letting go and with the second he tends, inclines and leans towards Nibbāna, like the body that was tending, inclining and leaning towards the opposite bank; then, being with the third next to Nibbāna, which is now attainable, like the other’s arriving above the opposite bank, he lets go that information as object with the ceasing of that consciousness, and with the change-of-lineage consciousness he falls on to the unformed Nibbāna, the bank opposite; but staggering, as the man did, for lack of [previous] repetition, he is not yet properly steady on the single object. After that he is steadied by path knowledge.

.. _XXII.7:

:ref:`§7 <XXII.7>` *[703/761]* Herein, conformity is able to dispel the murk of defilements that conceals the truths, but is unable to make Nibbāna its object. Change-of-lineage is only able to make Nibbāna its object, but it is unable to dispel the murk that conceals the truths.

.. _XXII.8:

:ref:`§8 <XXII.8>` Here is a simile:  ``674``  A man with eyes went out at night, it seems, to find out the conjunction of the stars, and he looked up to see the moon. It was invisible because it was concealed by clouds. Then a wind sprang up and blew away the thick clouds; another blew away the medium clouds; and another blew away the fine clouds as well. Then the man saw the moon in the sky free from clouds, and he found out the conjunction of the stars.

.. _XXII.9:

:ref:`§9 <XXII.9>` Herein, the thick, medium and fine kinds of darkness that conceal the truths are like the three kinds of cloud. The three kinds of conformity consciousness are like the three winds. Change-of-lineage knowledge is like the man with eyes. Nibbāna is like the moon. The dispelling of the murk that conceals the truths by each kind of conformity consciousness is like the successive blowing away of the clouds by each wind. Change-of-lineage knowledge’s seeing the clear Nibbāna when the murk that concealed the truths has disappeared is like the man’s seeing the clear moon in the sky free from cloud.

.. _XXII.10:

:ref:`§10 <XXII.10>` Just as the three winds are able only to blow away the clouds that conceal the moon but cannot see the moon, so the three kinds of conformity are able only to dispel the murk that conceals the truths but cannot see Nibbāna. Just as the man can only see the moon but cannot blow away the clouds, so change-of-lineage knowledge can only see Nibbāna but cannot dispel the defilements. Hence it is called “adverting to the path.”

.. _XXII.11:

:ref:`§11 <XXII.11>` For although it is not adverting, it occupies the position of adverting; and then, after, as it were, giving a sign to the path to come into being, it ceases. And without pausing after the sign given by that the change-of-lineage knowledge, the path follows upon it in uninterrupted continuity, and as it comes into being it pierces and explodes the mass of greed, the mass of hate, and the mass of delusion never pierced and exploded before (cf.  [Paṭis]_ *II 20*\  ).

.. _XXII.12:

:ref:`§12 <XXII.12>` Here is a simile for this. An archer, it seems, had a target [#3]_  set up at a distance of eight *usabhas*\  (about 100 yards), and wrapping his face in a cloth and arming himself with an arrow, he stood on a wheel contrivance (a revolving platform). Another man turned the wheel contrivance, and when the target was opposite the archer, he gave him a sign with a stick. Without pausing after the sign the archer shot the arrow and hit the target.

.. _XXII.13:

:ref:`§13 <XXII.13>` Herein, change-of-lineage knowledge is like the sign with the stick. Path knowledge is like the archer. Path knowledge’s  ``675``  making Nibbāna its object without pausing after the sign given by change-of-lineage, and its piercing and exploding the mass of greed, hate and delusion never pierced and exploded before, is like the archer’s hitting the target without pausing after the sign.

.. _XXII.14:

:ref:`§14 <XXII.14>` *[704/762]* And not only does it cause the piercing of this mass of greed, etc., but it also dries up the ocean of suffering of the round in the beginningless round of rebirths. It closes all doors to the states of loss. It provides actual experience of the seven noble treasures. [#4]_  It abandons the eightfold wrong path. It allays all enmity and fear. [#5]_  It leads to the state of the Fully Enlightened One’s breast-born son (see  [S]_ *II 221*\  ). And it leads to the acquisition of many hundred other blessings. So it is the knowledge associated with the path of stream-entry, the provider of many hundred blessings, that is called knowledge of the path of stream-entry.

The first kind of knowledge is ended.

1.2 The First Fruition—Second Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.15:

:ref:`§15 <XXII.15>` Immediately next to that knowledge, however, there arise either two or three fruition consciousnesses, which are its result. For it is owing to this very fact that supramundane profitable [consciousness] results immediately that it is said, “And which he called the concentration with immediate result” (Sn 226), and “Sluggishly he reaches what has immediate result for the destruction of the cankers” ( [A]_ *II 149*\  ), and so on.

.. _XXII.16:

:ref:`§16 <XXII.16>` Some, however, say that there are one, two, three, four, or five fruition consciousnesses. That is inadmissible. For change-of-lineage knowledge arises at the end of conformity’s repetition, so at the minimum there must be two conformity consciousnesses, since one alone does not act as repetition condition. And a single series of impulsions has a maximum of seven [impulsion] consciousnesses. Consequently, that series which has two conformities and change-of-lineage as a third and path consciousness as fourth has three fruition consciousnesses. That which has three conformities and change-of-lineage as fourth and path consciousness as fifth has two fruition consciousnesses. That is why it was said above, “There arise either two or three fruition consciousnesses.”

.. _XXII.17:

:ref:`§17 <XXII.17>` Then some say that which has four conformities and change-of-lineage as fifth and path consciousness as sixth has one fruition consciousness. But that is refuted because it is the fourth or fifth [impulsion] that reaches [the path], not those after that, owing to their nearness to the life-continuum (see :ref:`IV.75 <IV.75>`). So that cannot be accepted as correct.  ``676`` 

.. _XXII.18:

:ref:`§18 <XXII.18>` And at this point this stream-enterer is called the second noble person. However negligent he may be, he is bound to make an end of suffering when he has travelled and traversed the round of rebirths among deities and human beings for the seventh time.

.. _XXII.19:

:ref:`§19 <XXII.19>` At the end of the fruition his consciousness enters the life-continuum. After that, it arises as mind-door adverting interrupting the life-continuum for the purpose of reviewing the path. When that has ceased, seven impulsions of path reviewing *[705/763]* arise. After re-entry into the life-continuum, adverting, etc., arise again in the same way for the purpose of reviewing fruition, and so on. With the arising of these he reviews the path, he reviews the fruition, he reviews the defilements abandoned, he reviews the defilements still remaining, and he reviews Nibbāna.

.. _XXII.20:

:ref:`§20 <XXII.20>` He reviews the path in this way, “So this is the path I have come by.” Next he reviews the fruition after that in this way, “This is the blessing I have obtained.” Next he reviews the defilements that have been abandoned, “These are the defilements abandoned in me.” Next he reviews the defilements still to be eliminated by the three higher paths, “These are the defilements still remaining in me.” And lastly he reviews the deathless Nibbāna in this way, “This is the state (*dhamma*\ ) that has been penetrated by me as object.” So the noble disciple who is a stream-enterer has five kinds of reviewing.

.. _XXII.21:

:ref:`§21 <XXII.21>` And as in the case of the stream-enterer, so also in the cases of the once-returner and non-returner. But the Arahant has no reviewing of remaining defilements. So all the kinds of reviewing total nineteen. This is the maximum number. Trainers may or may not have the reviewing of the defilements abandoned and those still remaining. In fact it was owing to the absence of such reviewing that Mahānāma asked the Blessed One, “What state is there still unabandoned by me internally owing to which at times states of greed invade my mind and remain?” ( [M]_ *I 91*\  ) all of which should be quoted.

1.3 The Second Path—Third Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.22:

:ref:`§22 <XXII.22>` However, after reviewing in this way, either while sitting in the same session or on another occasion, the noble disciple who is a stream-enterer makes it his task to reach the second plane by attenuating both greed for sense desires and ill-will. He brings to bear the faculties, [#6]_  the powers, and the enlightenment factors, and he works over and turns up that same field of formations, classed as materiality, feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, with the knowledge that they are impermanent, painful, not-self, and he embarks upon the progressive series of insights.

.. _XXII.23:

:ref:`§23 <XXII.23>` When he has  ``677``  done so, and when, at the end of equanimity about formations, conformity and change-of-lineage [#7]_  knowledge have arisen in a single *[706/764]* adverting in the way already described, then the path of once-return arises next to change-of-lineage. The knowledge associated with that is knowledge of the path of once-return.

The second kind of knowledge is ended.

1.4 The Second Fruition—Fourth Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.24:

:ref:`§24 <XXII.24>` The fruition consciousness should be understood to follow immediately upon this knowledge in the same way as before. And at this point this once-returner is called the fourth noble person. He is bound to make an end of suffering after returning once to this world. Next there comes reviewing in the way already described.

1.5 The Third Path—Fifth Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.25:

:ref:`§25 <XXII.25>` Now, after reviewing in this way, either while sitting in the same session or on another occasion, this noble disciple who is a once-returner makes it his task to reach the third plane by abandoning, without remainder, both greed for the sense desires and ill-will. He brings to bear the faculties, the powers, and the enlightenment factors, and he works over and turns up that same field of formations with the knowledge that they are impermanent, painful, not-self, and he embarks upon the progressive series of insights.

.. _XXII.26:

:ref:`§26 <XXII.26>` When he has done so, and when, at the end of equanimity about formations, conformity and change-of-lineage have arisen in a single adverting in the way already described, then the path of non-return arises next to change-of-lineage. The knowledge associated with that is knowledge of the path of non-return.

The third kind of knowledge is ended.

1.6 The Third Fruition—Sixth Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.27:

:ref:`§27 <XXII.27>` The fruition consciousnesses should be understood to follow immediately upon this knowledge in the same way as before. And at this point this non-returner is called the sixth noble person. [After death] he reappears apparitionally [elsewhere] and attains complete extinction there without ever returning, without ever coming to this world again through rebirth-linking. Next there comes reviewing in the way already described.

1.7 The Fourth Path—Seventh Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.28:

:ref:`§28 <XXII.28>` Now, after reviewing in this way, either while sitting in the same session or on another occasion, this noble disciple who is a non-returner makes it his task to reach the fourth plane by abandoning, without remainder, greed for the fine-material and immaterial, conceit (pride), agitation, and ignorance. He brings to bear the faculties, the powers, and the enlightenment factors, and he works over  ``678``  and turns up that same field of formations with the knowledge that they are impermanent, painful, not-self, and he embarks upon the progressive series of insights.

.. _XXII.29:

:ref:`§29 <XXII.29>` When he has done so, and when, at the end of equanimity about formations, conformity and change-of-lineage have arisen in a single adverting, then the *[707/765]* path of Arahantship arises next to change-of-lineage. The knowledge associated with that is knowledge of the path of Arahantship.

The fourth kind of knowledge is ended.

1.8 The Fourth Fruition—Eighth Noble Person
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.30:

:ref:`§30 <XXII.30>` The fruition consciousness should be understood to follow immediately upon this knowledge in the same way as before. And at this point this Arahant is called the eighth noble person. He is one of the Great Ones with cankers destroyed, he bears this last body, he has laid down the burden, reached his goal and destroyed the fetter of becoming, he is rightly liberated with [final] knowledge and worthy of the highest offering of the world with its deities.

.. _XXII.31:

:ref:`§31 <XXII.31>` So when it was said above, “However, purification by knowledge and vision properly consists in knowledge of the four paths, that is to say, the path of stream-entry, the path of once-return, the path of non-return, and the path of Arahantship” (:ref:`§2 <XXII.2>`), that referred to these four kinds of knowledge to be reached in this order.

2 II. The States Associated with the Path, Etc.
---------------------------------------------------



.. _XXII.32:

:ref:`§32 <XXII.32>` Now, in order to appreciate the value of this same purification by knowledge and vision with its four kinds of knowledge:

\(1) fulfilment of states sharing in enlightenment,

\(2) Emergence, and (3) the coupling of the powers,

\(4) The kinds of states that ought to be abandoned,

\(5) Also the act of their abandoning,

\(6) Functions of full-understanding, and the rest

As stated when truths are penetrated to,

\(7) Each one of which ought to be recognized According to its individual essence.

2.1 The 37 states partaking of enlightenment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.33:

:ref:`§33 <XXII.33>` *1.*\  Herein, the *fulfilment of states sharing in enlightenment*\  is the fulfilledness of those states partaking in enlightenment. For they are the following thirty-seven states: the four foundations of mindfulness (MN 10), the four right endeavours ( [M]_ *II 11*\  ), the four roads to power ( [M]_ *I 103*\  ), the five faculties ( [M]_ *II 12*\  ), the five powers ( [M]_ *II 12*\  ), the seven enlightenment factors ( [M]_ *I 11*\  ), and the Noble Eightfold Path ( [D]_ *II 311f.*\  ). And they are called “partaking of enlightenment” because they take the part of the Noble Eightfold Path, which is called “enlightenment” in the sense of enlightening, and they “take the part” of that because they are helpful. [#8]_ 

.. _XXII.34:

:ref:`§34 <XXII.34>` *[708/766]* “Foundation” (*paṭṭhāna*\ ) is because of establishment (*upaṭṭhāna*\ ) by going down into, by descending upon, such and such objects. [#9]_  Mindfulness itself as foundation (establishment) is “foundation of mindfulness.” It is of four kinds because it occurs with respect to the body, feeling, consciousness, and mental objects (*dhamma*\ ), taking them as foul, painful, impermanent, and non-self, and because it accomplishes the function of abandoning perception of beauty, pleasure, permanence, and self.  ``679``  That is why “four foundations of mindfulness” is said.

.. _XXII.35:

:ref:`§35 <XXII.35>` By it they endeavour (*padahanti*\ ), thus it is endeavour (*padhāna*\ ); a good endeavour is a right (*sammā*\ ) endeavour. Or alternatively: by its means people endeavour rightly (*sammā padahanti*\ ), thus it is right endeavour (*sammappadhāna*\ ). Or alternatively: it is good because of abandoning the unseemliness of defilement, and it is endeavour because of bringing about improvement and giving precedence (*padhāna-bhāva-kāraṇa*\ ) in the sense of producing well-being and bliss, thus it is right endeavour. It is a name for energy. It accomplishes the functions of abandoning arisen unprofitable things, preventing the arising of those not yet arisen, arousing unarisen profitable things, and maintaining those already arisen; thus it is fourfold. That is why “four right endeavours” is said.

.. _XXII.36:

:ref:`§36 <XXII.36>` Power (*iddhi*\ ) is in the sense of success (*ijjhana*\ ) as already described (:ref:`XII.44 <XII.44>`). It is the road (basis—*pāda*\ ) to that power (for that success—*iddhi*\ ) in the sense of being the precursor of that success which is associated with it and in the sense of being the prior cause of that success which is its fruit, thus it is a road to power (basis for success). It is fourfold as zeal (desire), and so on. That is why “four roads to power” are spoken of, according as it is said: “Four roads to power: the road to power consisting in zeal, the road to power consisting in energy, the road to power consisting in [natural purity of] consciousness, the road to power consisting in inquiry” ( [Vibh]_ *223*\  ). These are supramundane only. But because of the words “If a bhikkhu obtains concentration, obtains mental unification by making zeal predominant, this is called concentration through zeal” ( [Vibh]_ *216*\  ), etc., they are also mundane as states acquired by predominance of zeal, etc., respectively.

.. _XXII.37:

:ref:`§37 <XXII.37>` “Faculty” is in the sense of predominance, in other words, of overcoming, because [these states, as faculties] respectively overcome faithlessness, idleness, negligence, distraction, and confusion.

“Power” is in the sense of unwaveringness because [these states, as powers] are incapable of being overcome respectively by faithlessness, and so on. Both are fivefold as consisting in faith, [energy, mindfulness, concentration, and understanding]. That is why “five faculties” and “five powers” is said.

.. _XXII.38:

:ref:`§38 <XXII.38>` *[709/767]* Mindfulness, [investigation-of-states, energy, happiness, tranquillity concentration, and equanimity,] as factors in a being who is becoming enlightened, are the “seven enlightenment factors.” And right view, [right thinking, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration,] are the eight “path factors” in the sense of being an outlet. Hence, “seven enlightenment factors” and “the Noble Eightfold Path” is said.

.. _XXII.39:

:ref:`§39 <XXII.39>` So there are these thirty-seven states partaking of enlightenment.

Now, in the prior stage when mundane insight is occurring, they are found in a plurality of consciousnesses as follows: the foundation of mindfulness consisting in contemplation of the body [is found] in one discerning the body in the fourteen ways; [#10]_  the foundation of mindfulness consisting in contemplation of feeling, in one discerning feeling in the nine ways; the foundation of mindfulness consisting in the contemplation of mind, in one discerning the [manner of] consciousness in sixteen ways;  ``680``  the foundation of mindfulness consisting in contemplation of mental objects, in one discerning mental objects in the five ways. And at the time when, on seeing an unprofitable state arisen in someone else, which has not yet arisen in his own person, he strives for its non-arising thus, “I shall not behave as he has done in whom this is now arisen, and so this will not arise in me,” then he has the first right endeavour; when, seeing something unprofitable in his own behaviour, he strives to abandon it, then he has the second; when he strives to arouse jhāna or insight so far unarisen in this person, he has the third; and when he arouses again and again what has already arisen so that it shall not diminish, he has the fourth. And at the time of arousing a profitable state with zeal as the motive force, there is the road to power consisting in zeal, [and so on with the remaining three roads to power]. And at the time of abstaining from wrong speech there is right speech, [and so on with abstaining from wrong action and wrong livelihood]. [#11]_ 

At the time of arising of [any one of] the four kinds of [path] knowledge, [all these states] are found in a single consciousness. In the moment of fruition the thirty-three excepting the four right endeavours are found.

.. _XXII.40:

:ref:`§40 <XXII.40>` *[710/768]* When these are found in a single consciousness in this way, it is the one kind of mindfulness whose object is Nibbāna that is called “the four foundations of mindfulness” because it accomplishes the function of abandoning the [four] perceptions of beauty, etc., in the [four things] beginning with the body. And also the one kind of energy is called “four right endeavours” because it accomplishes the [four] functions beginning with preventing the arising of the unarisen [unprofitable]. But there is no decrease or increase with the rest.

.. _XXII.41:

:ref:`§41 <XXII.41>` Furthermore it is said of them:




| Nine in one way, one in two ways,
| Then in four ways, and in five ways,
| In eight ways, and in nine ways, too—
| So in six ways they come to be.


.. _XXII.42:

:ref:`§42 <XXII.42>` (i) *Nine in one way*\ : these nine are zeal, consciousness, happiness, tranquillity, equanimity, thinking, speech, action, and livelihood, and they are found “in one way” as road to power consisting in zeal, etc., since they do not belong to any other group. (ii) *One in two ways*\ : faith is found “in two ways,” as a faculty and as a power. (iii) *Then in four ways, and*\  (iv) *in five ways*\ : the meaning is that another one is found in four ways and another in five. Herein, concentration is the “one in four ways” since it is a faculty, a power, an enlightenment factor, and a path factor; understanding is the “one in five ways” since it is these four and also a road to power. (v) *In eight ways, and* (vi) *in nine ways, too*\ : the meaning is that another one is found in eight ways and another in nine ways. Mindfulness is one “in eight ways” since it is the four foundations of mindfulness, a faculty, a power, an enlightenment factor, and a path factor; energy is the one “in nine ways” since it is four right endeavours, a road to power, a faculty, a power, an enlightenment factor, and a path factor.  ``681``  So:

.. _XXII.43:

:ref:`§43 <XXII.43>` 




| States sharing in enlightenment
| Are fourteen, undistributed;
| They total thirty-seven states
| Among the groups distributed.





| While each performs the proper task
| That to its special lot falls due,
| They all come into being when
| The Noble Eightfold Path comes true.


This is how, firstly, the “fulfilment of states partaking in enlightenment” should be understood here.

2.2 Emergence and coupling of the powers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.44:

:ref:`§44 <XXII.44>` *2. Emergence* and *3. coupling of the powers*\ : the resolution of the compound *vuṭṭhānabalasamāyoga*\  is *vuṭṭhānañ c’eva bala-samāyogo ca*\ .

[*2. Emergence*\ :] mundane insight induces no emergence either from occurrence [of defilement internally], because it does not cut off originating, which is the act of causing occurrence, [#12]_  or from the sign [of formations externally], because it has the sign as object. *[711/769]* Change-of-lineage knowledge does not induce emergence from occurrence [internally] because it does not cut off originating, but it does induce emergence from the sign [externally] because it has Nibbāna as its object; so there is emergence from one. Hence it is said, “Understanding of emergence and turning away from the external is knowledge of change-of-lineage” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 66*\  ). Likewise the whole passage, “Having turned away from arising, it enters into non-arising, thus it is change-of-lineage. Having turned away from occurrence … (etc.—for elision see Ch. :ref:`XXI.37 <XXI.37>`) … [Having turned away from the sign of formations externally, it enters into cessation, Nibbāna, thus it is change-of-lineage]” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 67*\  ), should be understood here.

These four kinds of [path] knowledge emerge from the sign because they have the signless as their object, and also from occurrence because they cut off origination. So they emerge from both. Hence it is said:

.. _XXII.45:

:ref:`§45 <XXII.45>` “How is it that understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path?

“At the moment of the stream-entry path, right view in the sense of seeing (a) emerges from wrong view, and it emerges from defilements and from the aggregates that occur consequent upon that [wrong view], [#13]_  and (b) externally it emerges from all signs; hence it was said: Understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path. Right thinking in the sense of directing emerges from wrong thinking … Right speech in the sense of embracing emerges from wrong speech … Right action in the sense of originating emerges from wrong action … Right livelihood in the sense of cleansing emerges from wrong livelihood … Right effort in the sense of exerting emerges from wrong effort … Right mindfulness in the sense of establishment emerges from wrong mindfulness … Right concentration in the sense of non-distraction emerges from wrong concentration and it emerges from defilements and from the aggregates that occur consequent upon that [wrong concentration], and externally it emerges from all signs; hence it was said: Understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path.

“At the moment of the once-return path, right view in the sense of seeing … Right concentration in the sense of non-distraction (a) emerges from the gross fetter of greed for sense desires, from the gross fetter of resentment, from the gross inherent tendency to greed for sense desires, and from the gross inherent tendency to resentment, [and it emerges from defilements and from the aggregates consequent upon that, and (b) externally it emerges from all signs; hence it was said: Understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path].

“At the moment of the non-return path, right view in the sense of seeing … Right concentration in the sense of non-distraction (a) emerges  ``682``  from the *[712/770]* residual fetter of greed for sense desires, from the residual fetter of resentment, from the residual inherent tendency to greed for sense desires, from the residual inherent tendency to resentment, [and it emerges from defilements and from the aggregates that occur consequent upon that, and (b) externally it emerges from all signs; hence it was said: Understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path].

“At the moment of the Arahant path, right view in the sense of seeing … Right concentration in the sense of non-distraction (a) emerges from greed for the fine-material [existence], from greed for immaterial [existence], from conceit (pride), from agitation, from ignorance, from the inherent tendency to conceit (pride), from the inherent tendency to greed for becoming, from the inherent tendency to ignorance, and it emerges from defilements and from the aggregates that occur consequent upon that, and (b) externally it emerges from all signs; hence it was said: Understanding of emergence and turning away from both is knowledge of the path” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 69f.*\  ).

.. _XXII.46:

:ref:`§46 <XXII.46>` [*3. Coupling of the powers*\ :] At the time of developing the eight mundane attainments the serenity power is in excess, while at the time of developing the contemplations of impermanence, etc., the insight power is in excess. But at the noble path moment they occur coupled together in the sense that neither one exceeds the other. So there is coupling of the powers in the case of each one of these four kinds of knowledge, according as it is said: “When he emerges from the defilements associated with agitation, and from the aggregates, his mental unification, non-distraction, concentration, has cessation as its domain. When he emerges from the defilements associated with ignorance and from the aggregates, his insight in the sense of contemplation has cessation as its domain. So serenity and insight have a single nature in the sense of emergence, they are coupled together, and neither exceeds the other. Hence it was said: He develops serenity and insight coupled together in the sense of emergence” ( [Paṭis]_ *II 98*\  ).

“Emergence” and “coupling of the powers” should be understood here in this way.

2.3 States to be abandoned
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.47:

:ref:`§47 <XXII.47>` *4. The kinds of states that ought to be abandoned*\ , 5. *also the act of their abandoning*\ : now which states are to be abandoned by which kind of knowledge among these four should be understood, and also the act of abandoning them. For they each and severally bring about the act of abandoning of the states called fetters, defilements, wrongnesses, worldly states, kinds of avarice, perversions, ties, bad ways, cankers, floods, bonds, hindrances, adherences, clingings, inherent tendencies, stains, unprofitable courses of action, and unprofitable thought-arisings.

.. _XXII.48:

:ref:`§48 <XXII.48>` Herein, the *fetters*\  are the ten states beginning with greed for the fine material, so called because they fetter aggregates [in this life] to aggregates [of the next], or kamma to its fruit, or beings to suffering. For as long as those exist there is no cessation of the others. And of these fetters, greed for the fine material, greed for the immaterial, conceit (pride), agitation, and ignorance are called the five higher fetters because they fetter beings to aggregates, etc., produced in higher [forms of becoming],  ``683``  while false view of individuality, uncertainty, adherence to *[713/771]* rules and vows, greed for sense desires, and resentment are called the five lower fetters because they fetter beings to aggregates, etc., produced in the lower [forms of becoming].

.. _XXII.49:

:ref:`§49 <XXII.49>` The *defilements*\  are the ten states, namely, greed, hate, delusion, conceit (pride), [false] view, uncertainty, stiffness [of mind], agitation, consciencelessness, shamelessness. They are so called because they are themselves defiled and because they defile their associated states.

.. _XXII.50:

:ref:`§50 <XXII.50>` The *wrongnesses*\  are the eight states, namely, wrong view, wrong thinking, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration, which with wrong knowledge and wrong deliverance, [#14]_  come to ten. They are so called because they occur wrongly.

.. _XXII.51:

:ref:`§51 <XXII.51>` The *worldly states*\  are the eight, namely, gain, loss, fame, disgrace, pleasure, pain, blame, and praise. They are so called because they continually succeed each other as long as the world persists. But when the worldly states are included, then by the metaphorical use of the cause’s name [for its fruit], the approval that has the gain, etc., as its object and the resentment that has the loss, etc., as its object should also be understood as included.

.. _XXII.52:

:ref:`§52 <XXII.52>` The *kinds of avarice*\  are the five, namely, avarice about dwellings, families, gain, Dhamma, and praise, which occur as inability to bear sharing with others any of these things beginning with dwellings.

.. _XXII.53:

:ref:`§53 <XXII.53>` The *perversions*\  are the three, namely, perversions of perception, of consciousness, and of view, which occur apprehending objects that are impermanent, painful, not-self, and foul (ugly), as permanent, pleasant, self, and beautiful.

.. _XXII.54:

:ref:`§54 <XXII.54>` The *ties*\  are the four beginning with covetousness, so called because they tie the mental body and the material body. They are described as “the bodily tie of covetousness, the bodily tie of ill will, the bodily tie of adherence to rules and vows, and the bodily tie of insisting (misinterpreting) that ‘This [only] is the truth’” ( [Vibh]_ *374*\  ).

.. _XXII.55:

:ref:`§55 <XXII.55>` *Bad ways*\  is a term for doing what ought not to be done and not doing what ought to be done, out of zeal (desire), hate, delusion, and fear. They are called “bad ways” because they are ways not to be travelled by Noble Ones.

.. _XXII.56:

:ref:`§56 <XXII.56>` *Cankers* (*āsava*\ ): as far as (*ā*\ ) change-of-lineage [in the case of states of consciousness] and as far as (*ā*\ ) the acme of becoming [in the case of the kinds of becoming, that is to say, the fourth immaterial state,] there are exudations (*savana*\ ) owing to the [formed nature of the] object. This is a term for greed for sense desires, greed for becoming, wrong view, and ignorance, because of the exuding (*savana*\ ) [of these defilements] from unguarded sense-doors like water from cracks *[714/772]* in a pot in the sense of constant trickling, or because of their producing (*savana*\ ) the suffering of the round of rebirths. [#15]_   ``684`` 

The *floods*\  are so called in the sense of sweeping away into the ocean of becoming, and in the sense of being hard to cross.

The *bonds*\  are so called because they do not allow disengagement from an object and disengagement from suffering. Both “floods” and “bonds” are terms for the cankers already mentioned.

.. _XXII.57:

:ref:`§57 <XXII.57>` The *hindrances*\  are the five, namely, lust, [ill will, stiffness and torpor, agitation and worry, and uncertainty,] in the sense of obstructing and hindering and concealing [reality] from consciousness (:ref:`IV.86 <IV.86>`).

.. _XXII.58:

:ref:`§58 <XXII.58>` *Adherence* (*misapprehension—parāmāsa*\ ) is a term for wrong view, because it occurs in the aspect of missing the individual essence of a given state (*dhamma*\ ) and apprehending (*āmasana*\ ) elsewhere (*parato*\ ) an unactual individual essence.

.. _XXII.59:

:ref:`§59 <XXII.59>` The *clingings*\  are the four beginning with sense-desire clinging described in all their aspects in the Description of the Dependent Origination (Ch. :ref:`XVII.240f. <XVII.240>`).

.. _XXII.60:

:ref:`§60 <XXII.60>` The *inherent tendencies*\  are the seven, namely, greed for sense desires, etc., in the sense of the inveterateness, stated thus: the inherent tendency to greed for sense desires, the inherent tendency to resentment, conceit (pride), [false] view, uncertainty, greed for becoming, and ignorance. For it is owing to their inveteracy that they are called inherent tendencies (*anusaya*\ ) since they inhere (*anusenti*\ ) as cause for the arising of greed for sense desires, etc., again and again.

.. _XXII.61:

:ref:`§61 <XXII.61>` The *stains*\  are the three, namely, greed, hate, and delusion. They are so called because they are themselves dirty like oil, black, and mud, and because they dirty other things.

.. _XXII.62:

:ref:`§62 <XXII.62>` The *unprofitable courses of action*\  are the ten, namely, killing living things, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct; false speech, malicious speech, harsh speech, gossip; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. They are so called since they are both unprofitable action (*kamma*\ ) and courses that lead to unhappy destinies.

.. _XXII.63:

:ref:`§63 <XXII.63>` The *unprofitable thought-arisings*\  are the twelve consisting of the eight rooted in greed, the two rooted in hate, and the two rooted in delusion (:ref:`XIV.89f. <XIV.89>`).

.. _XXII.64:

:ref:`§64 <XXII.64>` So these [four kinds of knowledge] each and severally abandon these states beginning with the fetters. How?

The five states eliminated by the first knowledge in the case of the *fetters*\ , firstly, are: false view of personality, doubt, adherence to rules and vows, and *[715/773]* then greed for sense desires and resentment that are [strong enough] to lead to states of loss. The remaining gross greed for sense desires and resentment are eliminated by the second knowledge. Subtle greed for sense desires and resentment are eliminated by the third knowledge. The five beginning with greed for the fine material are only [actually] eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

In what follows, we shall not in every instance specify the fact with the expression “only [actually]”; nevertheless, whatever we shall say is eliminated by one of the [three] higher knowledges should be understood as only the [residual] state eliminated by the higher knowledge; for that state will have already been rendered not conducive to states of loss by the preceding knowledge.

.. _XXII.65:

:ref:`§65 <XXII.65>` In the case of the *defilements*\ , [false] view and uncertainty are eliminated by the first knowledge. Hate is eliminated by the third knowledge. Greed, delusion, conceit (pride), mental stiffness, agitation, consciencelessness, and shameless-ness are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.66:

:ref:`§66 <XXII.66>` In the case of the *wrongnesses*\ , wrong view, false speech, wrong action, and wrong  ``685``  livelihood are eliminated by the first knowledge. Wrong thinking, malicious speech, and harsh speech are eliminated by the third knowledge. And here only volition is to be understood as speech. Gossip, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration, wrong deliverance, and wrong knowledge are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.67:

:ref:`§67 <XXII.67>` In the case of the *worldly states*\ , resentment is eliminated by the third knowledge, and approval is eliminated by the fourth knowledge. Some say that approval of fame and praise is eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

The *kinds of avarice*\  are eliminated by the first knowledge only.

.. _XXII.68:

:ref:`§68 <XXII.68>` In the case of the *perversions*\ , the perversions of perception, consciousness, and view, which find permanence in the impermanent and self in the not-self, and the perversion of view finding pleasure in pain and beauty in the foul, are eliminated by the first knowledge. The perversions of perception and consciousness finding beauty in the foul are eliminated by the third path. The perversions of perception and consciousness finding pleasure in the painful are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.69:

:ref:`§69 <XXII.69>` In the case of *ties*\ , the bodily ties of adherence to rules and vows and of the insistence (misinterpretation) that “This is the truth” are eliminated by the first knowledge. The bodily tie of ill will is eliminated by the third knowledge. The remaining one is eliminated by the fourth path.

The *bad ways*\  are eliminated by the first knowledge only.

.. _XXII.70:

:ref:`§70 <XXII.70>` In the case of the *cankers*\ , the canker of view is eliminated by the first knowledge. The canker of sense desire is eliminated by the third knowledge. The other two are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

The same thing applies in the case of the *floods*\  and the *bonds*\ .

.. _XXII.71:

:ref:`§71 <XXII.71>` In the case of the *hindrances*\ , the hindrance of uncertainty is eliminated by the first knowledge. The three, namely, lust, ill will, and worry, are eliminated by *[716/774]* the third knowledge. Stiffness and torpor and agitation are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

*Adherence*\  is eliminated by the first knowledge only.

.. _XXII.72:

:ref:`§72 <XXII.72>` In the case of the *clingings*\ , since according to what is given in the texts all worldly states are sense desires, that is, sense desires as object (see  [Nidd]_ *I 1–2*\  ), and so greed both for the fine material and the immaterial falls under sense-desire clinging, consequently that sense-desire clinging is eliminated by the fourth knowledge. The rest are eliminated by the first knowledge.

.. _XXII.73:

:ref:`§73 <XXII.73>` In the case of the *inherent tendencies*\ , the inherent tendencies to [false] view and to uncertainty are eliminated by the first knowledge. The inherent tendencies to greed for sense desires and to resentment are eliminated by the third knowledge. The inherent tendencies to conceit (pride), to greed for becoming, and to ignorance are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.74:

:ref:`§74 <XXII.74>` In the case of the *stains*\ , the stain of hate is eliminated by the third knowledge, the others are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.75:

:ref:`§75 <XXII.75>` In the case of the *unprofitable courses of action*\ , killing living things, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, false speech, and wrong view are eliminated by the first knowledge. The three, namely, malicious speech, harsh speech, and ill will, are eliminated by the third knowledge. Gossip and covetousness are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.76:

:ref:`§76 <XXII.76>` In the case of the *unprofitable thought-arisings*\ , the four associated with [false] view, and that associated with uncertainty, making five, are eliminated by the first knowledge. The two associated with resentment are eliminated by the third knowledge. The rest are eliminated by the fourth knowledge.

.. _XXII.77:

:ref:`§77 <XXII.77>` And what is eliminated by any one of them is abandoned by it. That is why it was said above, “So these [four kinds of knowledge] each and severally abandon these states beginning with the fetters.”

.. _XXII.78:

:ref:`§78 <XXII.78>` *5. The act of the abandoning*\ : but how then? Do these [knowledges] abandon these states when they are past, or when they are future, or when  ``686``  they are present? What is the position here? For, firstly, if [they are said to abandon them] when past or future, it follows that the effort is fruitless. Why? Because what has to be abandoned is non-existent. Then if it is when they are present, it is likewise fruitless because the things to be abandoned exist simultaneously with the effort, and it follows that there is development of a path that has defilement, or it follows that defilements are dissociated [from consciousness] though there is no such thing as a present defilement dissociated from consciousness. [#16]_ 

.. _XXII.79:

:ref:`§79 <XXII.79>` *[717/775]* That is not an original argument; for in the text first the question is put: “When a man abandons defilements, does he abandon past defilements? Does he abandon future defilements? Does he abandon present defilements?” Then the objection is put in this way: “If he abandons past defilements, he destroys what has already been destroyed, causes to cease what has already ceased, causes to vanish what has already vanished, causes to subside what has already subsided. What is past, which is non-existent, that he abandons.” But this is denied in this way: “He does not abandon past defilements.” Then the objection is put in this way: “If he abandons future defilements, he abandons what has not been born, he abandons what has not been generated, he abandons what has not arisen, he abandons what has not become manifest. What is future, which is non-existent, that he abandons.” But this is denied in this way: “He does not abandon future defilements.” Then the objection is put in this way: “If he abandons present defilements, then though inflamed with greed he abandons greed, though corrupted with hate he abandons hate, though deluded he abandons delusion, though shackled [#17]_  he abandons conceit (pride), though misconceiving he abandons [false] view, though distracted he abandons agitation, though not having made up his mind he abandons uncertainty, though not having inveterate habits he abandons inherent tendency, dark and bright states occur coupled together, and there is development of a path that has defilement.” But this is all denied in this way: “He does not abandon past defilements, he does not abandon future defilements, he does not abandon present defilements.” Finally it is asked: “Then there is no path development, there is no realization of fruition, there is no abandoning of defilements, there is no penetration to the Dhamma (convergence of states)?” Then it is claimed: “There is path development … there is penetration to the Dhamma (convergence of states).”

And when it is asked: “In what way?” this is said: “Suppose there were a young tree with unborn fruit, and a man cut its root, then the unborn fruits of the tree would remain unborn and not come to be born, remain ungenerated and not come to be generated, remain unarisen and not come to be arisen, remain unmanifested and not come to be manifested. So too, arising is a cause, arising is a condition, for the generation of defilements. Seeing danger in defilements, consciousness enters into non-arising. With consciousness’s entering into non-arising the defilements that would be generated with arising as their condition remain unborn and do not come to be born … remain unmanifest and do not come to be manifested. So with the cessation of the cause there is the cessation of suffering.  ``687``  Occurrence is a cause … The sign is a cause … Accumulation is a cause, accumulation is a condition, for the generation of defilements. Seeing danger in accumulation, consciousness enters into non-accumulation. With consciousness’s entering into non-accumulation the defilements that would be generated with accumulation as their condition remain unborn and do not come to be born … remain unmanifest and do not come to be manifested. So with the *[718/776]* cessation of the cause there is cessation of suffering. So there is path development, there is realization of fruition, there is abandoning of defilements, and there is penetrating to the Dhamma” ( [Paṭis]_ *II 217–219*\  ).

.. _XXII.80:

:ref:`§80 <XXII.80>` What does that show? It shows abandoning of defilements that have soil [to grow in]. But are defilements that have soil [to grow in] past, future or present? They are simply those described as “arisen by having soil [to grow in].”

.. _XXII.81:

:ref:`§81 <XXII.81>` Now, there are various meanings of “arisen,” that is to say, (i) arisen as “actually occurring,” (ii) arisen as “been and gone,” (iii) arisen “by opportunity,” and (iv) arisen “by having [soil to grow in].”

Herein, (i) all that is reckoned to possess [the three moments of] arising, ageing, [that is, presence] and dissolution, is called *arisen as actually occurring*\ .

(ii) Profitable and unprofitable [kamma-result] experienced as the stimulus of an object and ceased-reckoned as “experienced and gone” (*anubhūtāpagata)—*\ , and also anything formed, when it has reached the three instants beginning with arising and has ceased-reckoned as ‘been and gone’ *(hutvāpagata)—,* are called *arisen as been and gone* (*bhūtāpagata*\ ).

(iii) Kamma described in the way beginning, “Deeds that he did in the past” ( [M]_ *III 164*\  ), even when actually past, is called *arisen by opportunity made*\  because it reaches presence by inhibiting other [ripening] kamma and making that the opportunity for its own result (see :ref:`XIX.16 <XIX.16>`.) And kamma-result that has its opportunity made in this way, even when as yet unarisen, is called “arisen by opportunity made,” too, because it is sure to arise when an opportunity for it has been made in this way.

(iv) While unprofitable [kamma] is still unabolished in any given soil (plane) [#18]_  it is called *arisen by having soil [to grow in*\ ].

.. _XXII.82:

:ref:`§82 <XXII.82>` And here the difference between the soil and what has soil should be understood. For “soil” (plane) means the five aggregates in the three planes of becoming, which are the object of insight. [#19]_  “What has soil” is an expression for defilements capable of arising with respect to those aggregates. Those defilements have that soil (plane). That is why “by having soil [to grow in]” is said.

.. _XXII.83:

:ref:`§83 <XXII.83>` And that is not meant objectively. For defilements occupied with an object arise with respect to any aggregates including past or future ones as well [as present], and also with respect to the [subjectively] fully-understood aggregates in someone [else] whose cankers are destroyed, like those that arose in the rich man Soreyya with respect to the aggregates in Mahā Kaccāna ( [Dhp-a]_ *I 325*\  ) and in the brahman student Nanda with respect to Uppalavaṇṇā ( [Dhp-a]_ *II 49*\  ), and *[719/777]* so on. And if that were what is called “arisen by having soil [to grow in]” no one could abandon the root of becoming because it would be unabandonable. But “arisen by having soil [to grow in]” should be understood [subjectively] with respect to the basis [for them in oneself]. [#20]_  For the defilements that are the root of the round are inherent in [one’s own] aggregates not fully understood by insight from the instant those aggregates arise. And that is what should be understood as “arisen by having the soil [to grow in],” in the sense of its being unabandoned.  ``688`` 

.. _XXII.84:

:ref:`§84 <XXII.84>` Now, when defilements are inherent, in the sense of being unabandoned, in someone’s aggregates, it is only those aggregates of his that are the basis for those defilements, not aggregates belonging to another. And only past aggregates, not others, are the basis for defilements that inhere unabandoned in past aggregates. Likewise in the case of future aggregates, and so on. Similarly too only sense-sphere aggregates, not others, are the basis for defilements that inhere unabandoned in sense-sphere aggregates. Likewise in the case of the fine material and immaterial.

.. _XXII.85:

:ref:`§85 <XXII.85>` But in the case of the stream-enterer, etc., when a given defilement, which is a root of the round, has been abandoned by means of a given path in a given noble person’s aggregates, then his aggregates are no longer called “soil” for such defilement since they are no longer a basis for it. But in an ordinary man the defilements that are the root of the round are not abandoned at all, and so whatever kamma he performs is always either profitable or unprofitable. So for him the round goes on revolving with kamma and defilements as its condition.

.. _XXII.86:

:ref:`§86 <XXII.86>` But while it is thus the root of the round it cannot be said that it is only in his materiality aggregate, and not in his other aggregates beginning with feeling … that it is only in his consciousness aggregate, and not in his other aggregates beginning with materiality. Why? Because it is inherent in all five aggregates indiscriminately. How? Like the juice of humus, etc., in a tree.

.. _XXII.87:

:ref:`§87 <XXII.87>` For when a great tree is growing on the earth’s surface supported by the essences of humus and water and, with that as condition, increases its roots, trunks, branches, twigs, shoots, foliage, flowers, and fruit, till it fills the sky, and continues the tree’s lineage through the succession of the seed up till the end of the eon, it cannot be said that the essence of humus, etc., are found only in its root and not in the trunk, etc., … that they are only in the fruit and not in the root, etc., Why? Because they spread indiscriminately through the whole of it from the root onwards.

.. _XXII.88:

:ref:`§88 <XXII.88>` But some man who felt revulsion for that same tree’s flowers, fruits, etc., might puncture it on four sides with the poison thorn called “*maṇḍūka*\  thorn,” and then the tree, being poisoned, would be no more able to prolong its continuity since it would have become barren with the contamination of the essences of humus and water. *[720/778]* So too the clansman who feels revulsion (dispassion) for the occurrence of the aggregates, undertakes to develop the four paths in his own continuity which is like the man’s application of poison to the tree on all four sides. Then the continuity of his aggregates is rendered incapable of prolonging the continuity to a subsequent becoming. It is now unproductive of future becoming since all kinds of kamma beginning with bodily kamma are now merely functional: for the effect of the four paths’ poison has entirely exterminated the defilements that are the root of the round.  ``689``  Being without clinging, he inevitably attains with the cessation of the last consciousness the complete extinction [of Nibbāna], like a fire with no more fuel. This is how the difference between the soil and what has soil should be understood.

.. _XXII.89:

:ref:`§89 <XXII.89>` Besides these there are four other ways of classing “arisen,” namely, (v) arisen as happening, (vi) arisen with apprehension of an object, (vii) arisen through non-suppression, (viii) arisen through non-abolition.

Herein, (v) *arisen as happening*\  is the same as (i) “arisen as actually occurring.”

(vi) When an object has at some previous time come into focus in the eye, etc., and defilement did not arise then but arose in full force later on simply because the object had been apprehended, then that defilement is called *arisen with apprehension of an object*\ . Like the defilement that arose in the Elder Mahā-Tissa after seeing the form of a person of the opposite sex while wandering for alms in the village of Kalyāna (cf.  [M-a]_ *I 66*\   and A-a to  [A]_ *I 4*\  ).

(vii) As long as a defilement is not suppressed by either serenity or insight, though it may not have actually entered the conscious continuity, it is nevertheless called *arisen through non-suppression*\  because there is no cause to prevent its arising [if suitable conditions combine]. (viii) But even when they are suppressed by serenity or insight they are still called *arisen through non-abolition*\  because the necessity for their arising has not been transcended unless they have been cut off by the path. Like the elder who had obtained the eight attainments, and the defilements that arose in him while he was going through the air on his hearing the sound of a woman singing with a sweet voice as she was gathering flowers in a grove of blossoming trees.

.. _XXII.90:

:ref:`§90 <XXII.90>` And the three kinds, namely, (vi) arisen with apprehension of an object, (vii) arisen through non-suppression, and (vii) arisen through non-abolition, should be understood as included by (iv) arisen by having soil [to grow in].

.. _XXII.91:

:ref:`§91 <XXII.91>` So as regard the kinds of “arisen” stated, the four kinds, namely, (i) as actually occurring, (ii) as been and gone, (iii) by opportunity made, and (v) as happening, cannot be abandoned by any [of these four kinds of] knowledge because they cannot be eliminated by the paths. But the four kinds of “arisen,” namely, (iv) by having soil [to grow in], (vi) with apprehension of an object, (vii) through non-suppression, and (viii) through non-abolition, can all be abandoned because a given mundane or supramundane knowledge, when it arises, nullifies a given one of these modes of being arisen.

So here “the kinds of states that ought to be abandoned, also the act of their abandoning” (:ref:`§32 <XXII.32>`) should be known in this way.

2.4 The Four Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.92:

:ref:`§92 <XXII.92>` *[721/779]* 




| (6) Functions of full-understanding and the rest
| As stated when truths are penetrated to,
| (7) Each one of which ought to be recognized
| According to its individual essence. (:ref:`§32 <XXII.32>`)


2.4.1 The Four Functions in a Single Moment
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""



*6.*\  Now, at the times of penetrating to the truths each one of the four [path] knowledges is said to exercise four functions in a single moment. These are full-understanding, abandoning, realizing, and developing; and each one of them ought to be recognized according to its individual essence.  ``690``  For this is said by the Ancients: “Just as a lamp performs the four functions simultaneously in a single moment—it burns the wick, dispels darkness, makes light appear, and uses up the oil—, so too, path knowledge penetrates to the four truths simultaneously in a single moment—it penetrates to suffering by penetrating to it with full-understanding, penetrates to origination by penetrating to it with abandoning, penetrates to the path by penetrating to it with developing, and penetrates cessation by penetrating to it with realizing” (see  [Peṭ]_ *134*\  ). What is meant? By making cessation its object it reaches, sees and pierces the four truths.”

.. _XXII.93:

:ref:`§93 <XXII.93>` For this is said: “Bhikkhus, he who sees suffering sees also the origin of suffering, sees also the cessation of suffering, sees also the way leading to the cessation of suffering” ( [S]_ *V 437*\  ), etc., and so it should be understood [for all the other three truths]. And further it is said: “The knowledge of one who possesses the path is knowledge of suffering and it is knowledge of the origin of suffering and it is knowledge of the cessation of suffering and it is knowledge of the way leading to the cessation of suffering” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 119*\  ).

.. _XXII.94:

:ref:`§94 <XXII.94>` As the lamp burns the wick, so his path knowledge fully understands suffering; as the lamp dispels the darkness, so the knowledge abandons origin; as the lamp makes the light appear, so the knowledge [as right view] develops the path, in other words, the states consisting in right thinking, etc., [by acting] as conascence, etc., for them; and as the lamp uses up the oil, so the knowledge realizes cessation, which brings defilements to an end. This is how the application of the simile should be understood.

.. _XXII.95:

:ref:`§95 <XXII.95>` Another method: as the sun, when it rises, performs four functions simultaneously with its appearance—it illuminates visible objects, dispels darkness, causes light to be seen, and allays cold—, so too, path knowledge … penetrates to cessation by penetrating to it with realizing. And here also, as the sun illuminates visible objects, so path knowledge fully understands suffering; as the sun dispels darkness, so path knowledge abandons origin; as the sun causes light to be seen, so path knowledge [as right view] develops the [other] path [factors] by acting as [their] conascence condition, etc.; as the sun allays cold, so path knowledge realizes the cessation, which is the tranquilizing of defilements. This is how the application of the simile should be understood.

.. _XXII.96:

:ref:`§96 <XXII.96>` Another method: as a boat performs four functions simultaneously in a single moment—it leaves the hither shore, it cleaves the stream, it carries its *[722/780]* cargo,  ``691``  and it approaches the further shore—, so too, path knowledge … penetrates to cessation by penetrating to it with realizing. And here, as the boat leaves the hither shore, so path knowledge fully understands suffering; as the boat cleaves the stream, so path knowledge abandons origin; as the boat carries its cargo, so path knowledge develops the [other] path [factors] by acting as [their] conascence condition, etc.; as the boat approaches the further shore, so path knowledge realizes cessation, which is the further shore. This is how the application of the simile should be understood.

.. _XXII.97:

:ref:`§97 <XXII.97>` So when his knowledge occurs with the four functions in a single moment at the time of penetrating the four truths, then the four truths have a single penetration in the sense of trueness (reality) in sixteen ways, as it is said: “How is there single penetration of the four truths in the sense of trueness? There is single penetration of the four truths in the sense of trueness in sixteen aspects: suffering has the meaning of oppressing, meaning of being formed, meaning of burning (torment), meaning of change, as its meaning of trueness; origin has the meaning of accumulation, meaning of source, meaning of bondage, meaning of impediment, as its meaning of trueness; cessation has the meaning of escape, meaning of seclusion, meaning of being not formed, meaning of deathlessness, as its meaning of trueness; the path has the meaning of outlet, meaning of cause, meaning of seeing, meaning of dominance, as its meaning of trueness. The four truths in these sixteen ways are included as one. What is included as one is unity. Unity is penetrated by a single knowledge. Thus the four truths have a single penetration” ( [Paṭis]_ *II 107*\  ).

.. _XXII.98:

:ref:`§98 <XXII.98>` Here it may be asked: “Since there are other meanings of suffering, etc., too, such as ‘a disease, a tumour’ ( [Paṭis]_ *II 238*\  ;  [M]_ *I 435*\  ), etc., why then are only four mentioned for each?” We answer that in this context it is better because of what is evident through seeing the other [three truths in each case].

Firstly, in the passage beginning, “Herein, what is knowledge of suffering? It is the understanding, the act of understanding … that arises contingent upon suffering” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 119*\  ), knowledge of the truths is presented as having a single truth as its object [individually]. But in the passage beginning, “Bhikkhus, he who sees suffering also sees its origin” ( [S]_ *V 437*\  ), it is presented as accomplishing its function with respect to the other three truths simultaneously with its making one of them its object.

.. _XXII.99:

:ref:`§99 <XXII.99>` As regards these [two contexts], when, firstly, knowledge makes each truth its object singly, then [when suffering is made the object], suffering has the characteristic of *oppressing*\  as its individual essence, but its *sense of being formed* becomes evident through seeing origin because that suffering is accumulated, formed, agglomerated, by the origin, which has the characteristic of accumulating. Then the cooling path removes the burning of the defilements,  ``692``  and so suffering’s *sense of burning* becomes evident through seeing the path, as the beauty’s (Sundarī’s) ugliness did to the venerable Nanda through seeing the celestial nymphs (see  [Ud]_ *23*\  ). But its *sense of changing*\  becomes evident through seeing cessation as not subject to change, which needs no explaining.

.. _XXII.100:

:ref:`§100 <XXII.100>` *[723/781]* Likewise, [when origin is made the object,] origin has the characteristic of *accumulating*\  as its individual essence; but its *sense of source*\  becomes evident through seeing suffering, just as the fact that unsuitable food is the source of a sickness, becomes evident through seeing how a sickness arises owing to such food. Its *sense of bondage*\  becomes evident through seeing cessation, which has no bonds. And its *sense of impediment*\  becomes evident through seeing the path, which is the outlet.

.. _XXII.101:

:ref:`§101 <XXII.101>` Likewise, [when cessation is made the object,] cessation has the characteristic of an *escape*\ . But its *sense of seclusion*\  becomes evident through seeing origin as unsecluded. Its *sense of being not formed*\  becomes evident through seeing the path; for the path has never been seen by him before in the beginningless round of rebirths, and yet even that is formed since it has conditions, and so the unformedness of the conditionless becomes quite clear. But its *sense of being deathless*\  becomes evident through seeing suffering; for suffering is poison and Nibbāna is deathless.

.. _XXII.102:

:ref:`§102 <XXII.102>` Likewise, [when the path is made the object,] the path has the characteristic of the *outlet*\ . But its *sense of cause*\  becomes evident through seeing origin thus, “That is not the cause, [but on the contrary] this is the cause, for the attaining of Nibbāna.” Its *sense of seeing*\  becomes evident through seeing cessation, as the eye’s clearness becomes evident to one who sees very subtle visible objects and thinks, “How clear my eye is!” Its *sense of dominance*\  becomes evident through seeing suffering, just as the superiority of lordly people becomes evident through seeing wretched people afflicted with many diseases.

.. _XXII.103:

:ref:`§103 <XXII.103>` So in that [first] context four senses are stated for each truth because in the case of each truth [individually] one sense becomes evident as the specific characteristic, while the other three become evident through seeing the remaining three truths.

At the path moment, however, all these senses are penetrated simultaneously by a single knowledge that has four functions with respect to suffering and the rest. But about those who would have it that [the different truths] are penetrated to separately, more is said in the Abhidhamma in the Kathāvatthu ( [Kv]_ *212–220*\  ).

2.4.2 The Four Functions Described Separately
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""



.. _XXII.104:

:ref:`§104 <XXII.104>` *7.*\  Now, as to those four functions beginning with full-understanding, which were mentioned above (:ref:`§92 <XXII.92>`):




| (a) Full-understanding is threefold;
| So too (b) abandoning, and (c) realizing,
| And (d) two developings are reckoned—
| Thus should be known the exposition.


.. _XXII.105:

:ref:`§105 <XXII.105>` (a) *Full-understanding is threefold*\ , that is, (i) full understanding as the known, (ii) full-understanding as investigating (judging), and (iii) full-understanding as abandoning (see :ref:`XX.3 <XX.3>`).

.. _XXII.106:

:ref:`§106 <XXII.106>` (i) Herein, *full-understanding as the known*\   ``693``  is summarized thus: “Understanding that is direct-knowledge is knowledge in the sense of the *[724/782]* known” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It is briefly stated thus: “Whatever states are directly known are known” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It is given in detail in the way beginning: “Bhikkhus, all is to be directly known. And what is all that is to be directly known? Eye is to be directly known …” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 5*\  ). Its particular plane is the direct knowing of mentality-materiality with its conditions.

.. _XXII.107:

:ref:`§107 <XXII.107>` (ii) *Full-understanding as investigating (judging)*\  is summarized thus: “Understanding that is full-understanding is knowledge in the sense of investigation (judging)” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It is briefly stated thus: “Whatever states are fully understood are investigated (judged)” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It is given in detail in the way beginning: “Bhikkhus, all is to be fully understood. And what is all that is to be fully understood? The eye is to be fully understood …” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 22*\  ) Its particular plane starts with comprehension by groups, and occurring as investigation of impermanence, suffering, and not-self, it extends as far as conformity (cf. :ref:`XX.4 <XX.4>`).

.. _XXII.108:

:ref:`§108 <XXII.108>` (iii) *Full-understanding as abandoning*\  is summarized thus: “Understanding that is abandoning is knowledge in the sense of giving up” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It is stated in detail thus: Whatever states are abandoned are given up” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ). It occurs in the way beginning: “Through the contemplation of impermanence he abandons the perception of permanence …” (cf.  [Paṭis]_ *I 58*\  ). Its plane extends from the contemplation of dissolution up to path knowledge. This is what is intended here.

.. _XXII.109:

:ref:`§109 <XXII.109>` Or alternatively, full-understanding as the known and full-understanding as investigating have that [third kind] as their aim, too, and whatever states a man abandons are certainly known and investigated, and so all three kinds of full-understanding can be understood in this way as the function of path knowledge.

.. _XXII.110:

:ref:`§110 <XXII.110>` (b) *So too abandoning*\ : abandoning is threefold too, like full-understanding, that is, (i) abandoning by suppressing, (ii) abandoning by substitution of opposites, and (iii) abandoning by cutting off.

.. _XXII.111:

:ref:`§111 <XXII.111>` (i) Herein, when any of the mundane kinds of concentration suppresses opposing states such as the hindrances, that act of suppressing, which is like the pressing down of water-weed by placing a porous pot on weed-filled water, is called *abandoning by suppressing*\ . But the suppression of only the hindrances is given in the text thus: “And there is abandoning of the hindrances by suppression in one who develops the first jhāna” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 27*\  ). However, that should be understood as so stated because of the obviousness [of the suppression then]. For even before and after the jhāna as well hindrances do not invade consciousness suddenly; but applied thought, etc., [are suppressed] only at the moment of actual absorption [in the second jhāna, etc.,] and so the suppression of the hindrances then is obvious.

.. _XXII.112:

:ref:`§112 <XXII.112>` (ii) But what is called *abandoning by substitution of opposites*\  is the abandoning of any given state that ought to be abandoned through the means of a particular factor of knowledge, which as a constituent of insight is opposed to it, like the abandoning of darkness at night through the means of a light.  ``694``  It is in fact the abandoning firstly of the [false] view of individuality through *[725/783]* the means of delimitation of mentality-materiality; the abandoning of both the no-cause view and the fictitious-cause view and also of the stain of doubt through the means of discerning conditions; the abandoning of apprehension of a conglomeration as “I” and “mine” through the means of comprehension by groups; the abandoning of perception of the path in what is not the path through the means of the definition of what is the path and what is not the path; the abandoning of the annihilation view through the means of seeing rise; the abandoning of the eternity view through the means of seeing fall; the abandoning of the perception of non-terror in what is terror through the means of appearance as terror; the abandoning of the perception of enjoyment through the means of seeing danger; the abandoning of the perception of delight through the means of the contemplation of dispassion (revulsion); the abandoning of lack of desire for deliverance through the means of desire for deliverance; the abandoning of non-reflection through the means of reflection; the abandoning of not looking on equably through the means of equanimity; the abandoning of apprehension contrary to truth through the means of conformity.

.. _XXII.113:

:ref:`§113 <XXII.113>` And also in the case of the eighteen principal insights the abandoning by substitution of opposites is: (1) the abandoning of the perception of the perception of permanence, through the means of the contemplation of impermanence; (2) of the perception of pleasure, through the means of the contemplation of pain; (3) of the perception of self, through the means of the contemplation of not-self; (4) of delight, through the means of the contemplation of dispassion (revulsion); (5) of greed, through the means of the contemplation of fading away; (6) of originating, through the means of the contemplation of cessation; (7) of grasping, through the means of the contemplation of relinquishment; (8) of the perception of compactness, through the means of the contemplation of destruction; (9) of accumulation, through the means of the contemplation of fall; (10) of the perception of lastingness, through the means of the contemplation of change; (11) of the sign, through the means of the contemplation of the signless; (12) of desire, through the means of the contemplation of the desireless; (13) of misinterpreting (insisting), through the means of the contemplation of voidness; (14) of misinterpreting (insisting) due to grasping at a core, through the means of insight into states that is higher understanding; (15) of misinterpreting (insisting) due to confusion, through the means of correct knowledge and vision; (16) of misinterpreting (insisting) due to reliance [on formations], through the means of the contemplation of danger [in them]; (17) of non-reflection, through the means of the contemplation of reflection; (18) of misinterpreting (insisting) due to bondage, through means of contemplation of turning away (cf.  [Paṭis]_ *I 47*\  ).

.. _XXII.114:

:ref:`§114 <XXII.114>` Herein, (1)–(7) the way in which the abandoning of the perception of permanence, etc., takes place through the means of the seven contemplations beginning with that of impermanence has already been explained under the contemplation of dissolution (Ch. :ref:`XXI.15f. <XXI.15>`).

\(8) *Contemplation of destruction*\ , however, is the knowledge in one who effects the resolution of the compact and so sees destruction as “impermanent in the *[726/784]* sense of destruction.” Through the means of that knowledge there comes to be the abandoning of the perception of compactness.

.. _XXII.115:

:ref:`§115 <XXII.115>` (9) *Contemplation of fall*\  is stated thus:




| “Defining both to be alike
| By inference from that same object.
| Intentness on cessation—these
| Are insight in the mark of fall” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 58*\  ).


It is intentness on cessation, in other words, on that same dissolution, after seeing dissolution of [both seen and unseen] formations by personal experience and by inference [respectively]. Through the means of that contemplation there comes to be the abandoning of accumulation. When a man sees with insight that “The things for the sake of which I might accumulate [kamma] are thus  ``695``  subject to fall,” his consciousness no longer inclines to accumulation.

.. _XXII.116:

:ref:`§116 <XXII.116>` (10) *Contemplation of change*\  is the act of seeing, according to the material septad, etc., how [momentary] occurrences [in continuity] take place differently by [gradually] diverging from any definition; or it is the act of seeing change in the two aspects of the ageing and the death of what is arisen. Through the means of that contemplation the perception of lastingness is abandoned.

.. _XXII.117:

:ref:`§117 <XXII.117>` (11) *Contemplation of the signless*\  is the same as the contemplation of impermanence. Through its means the sign of permanence is abandoned.

\(12) *Contemplation of the desireless*\  is the same as the contemplation of pain.

Through its means desire for pleasure and hope for pleasure are abandoned.

\(13) *Contemplation of voidness*\  is the same as the contemplation of not-self. Through its means the misinterpreting (insisting) that “a self exists” (see  [S]_ *IV 400*\  ) is abandoned.

.. _XXII.118:

:ref:`§118 <XXII.118>` (14) Insight into states that is higher understanding is stated thus:




| “Having reflected on the object,
| Dissolution he contemplates,
| Appearance then as empty—this
| Is insight of higher understanding” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 58*\  ).


Insight so described occurs after knowing materiality, etc., as object, by seeing the dissolution both of that object and of the consciousness whose object it was, and by apprehending voidness through the dissolution in this way: “Only formations break up. It is the death of formations. There is nothing else.” Taking that insight as higher understanding and as insight with respect to states, it is called “insight into states that is higher understanding.” Through its means misinterpreting (insisting) due to grasping at a core is abandoned, because it has been clearly seen that there is no core of permanence and no core of self.

.. _XXII.119:

:ref:`§119 <XXII.119>` (15) *Correct knowledge and vision*\  is the discernment of mentality-materiality with its conditions. Through its means misinterpreting (insisting) due to confusion that occurs in this way, “Was I in the past?” ( [M]_ *I 8*\  ), and in this way, “The world was created by an Overlord,” are abandoned.

.. _XXII.120:

:ref:`§120 <XXII.120>` *[727/785]* (16) *Contemplation of danger*\  is knowledge seeing danger in all kinds of becoming, etc., which as arisen owing to appearance as terror. Through its means misinterpreting (insisting) due to reliance is abandoned, since he does not see any [formation] to be relied on for shelter.

\(17) *Contemplation of reflection* is the reflection that effects the means to liberation. Through its means non-reflection is abandoned.

.. _XXII.121:

:ref:`§121 <XXII.121>` (18) *Contemplation of turning away*\  is equanimity about formations and conformity. For at that point his mind is said to retreat, retract and recoil from the whole field of formations, as a water drop does on a lotus leaf that slopes a little. That is why through its means misinterpreting (insisting) due to bondage is abandoned.  ``696``  The meaning is: abandoning of the occurrence of defilement that consists in misinterpreting defiled by the bondage of sense desires, and so on.

Abandoning by substitution of the opposites should be understood in detail in this way. But in the texts it is stated in brief thus: “Abandoning of views by substitution of opposites comes about in one who develops concentration partaking of penetration” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 27*\  ).

.. _XXII.122:

:ref:`§122 <XXII.122>` (iii) The abandoning of the states beginning with the fetters by the noble path knowledge in such a way that they never occur again, like a tree struck by a thunderbolt, is called *abandoning by cutting off*\ . With reference to this it is said: “Abandoning by cutting off comes about in one who develops the supramundane path that leads to the destruction [of defilements]” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 27*\  ).

.. _XXII.123:

:ref:`§123 <XXII.123>` So of these three kinds of abandoning, it is only abandoning by cutting off that is intended here. But since that meditator’s previous abandoning by suppression and by substitution by opposites have that [third kind] as their aim, too, all three kinds of abandoning can therefore be understood in this way as the function of path knowledge. For when a man has gained an empire by killing off the opposing kings, what was done by him previous to that is also called “done by the king.”

.. _XXII.124:

:ref:`§124 <XXII.124>` (c) *Realizing*\  is divided into two as (i) mundane realizing, and (ii) supramundane realizing. And it is threefold too with the subdivision of the supramundane into two as seeing and developing.

.. _XXII.125:

:ref:`§125 <XXII.125>` (i) Herein, the touch (*phassanā*\ ) of the first jhāna, etc., as given in the way beginning, “I am an obtainer, a master, of the first jhāna; the first jhāna has been realized by me” ( [Vin]_ *III 93–94*\  ), is called *mundane realizing*\ . “Touch” (*phassanā*\ ) is the touching (*phusanā*\ ) with the contact (*phassa*\ ) of knowledge by personal experience on arriving, thus, “This has been arrived at by me”. [#21]_  With reference to this meaning realization is summarized thus, “Understanding that is *[728/786]* realization is knowledge in the sense of touch” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ), after which it is described thus, “Whatever states are realized are touched” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 87*\  ).

.. _XXII.126:

:ref:`§126 <XXII.126>` Also, those states which are not aroused in one’s own continuity and are known through knowledge that depends on another are realized; for it is said, referring to that, “Bhikkhus, all should be realized. And what is all that should be realized? The eye should be realized” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 35*\  ), and so on. And it is further said: “One who sees materiality realizes it. One who sees  ``697``  feeling … perception … formations … consciousness realizes it. One who sees the eye … (etc., see :ref:`XX.9 <XX.9>`) … ageing and death realizes it. [One who sees suffering] … (etc.) [#22]_  … One who sees Nibbāna, which merges in the deathless [in the sense of the end] realizes it. Whatever states are realized are touched” ( [Paṭis]_ *I 35*\  ).

.. _XXII.127:

:ref:`§127 <XXII.127>` (ii) The seeing of Nibbāna at the moment of the first path is *realizing as seeing*\ . At the other path moments it is *realizing as developing*\ . And it is intended as twofold here. So realizing of Nibbāna as seeing and as developing should be understood as a function of this knowledge.

.. _XXII.128:

:ref:`§128 <XXII.128>` (d) *And two developings are reckoned*\ : but developing is also reckoned as twofold, namely as (i) mundane developing, and (ii) as supramundane developing.

\(i) Herein, the arousing of mundane virtue, concentration and understanding, and the influencing of the continuity by their means, is *mundane developing*\ . And (ii) the arousing of supramundane virtue, concentration and understanding, and the influencing of the continuity by them, is *supramundane developing*\ . Of these, it is the supramundane that is intended here. For this fourfold knowledge arouses supramundane virtue, etc., since it is their conascence condition, and it influences the continuity by their means. So it is only supramundane developing that is a function of it. Therefore these are the:




| Functions of full-understanding, and the rest
| As stated when truths are penetrated to,
| Each one of which ought to be recognized
| According to its individual essence.


2.5 Conclusion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



.. _XXII.129:

:ref:`§129 <XXII.129>` Now, with reference to the stanza:




| “When a wise man, established well in virtue,
| Develops consciousness and understanding” (:ref:`I.1 <I.1>`),


it was said above “After he has perfected the two purifications that are the ‘roots,’ then he can develop the five purifications that are the ‘trunk’”(:ref:`XIV.32 <XIV.32>`). And at this point the detailed exposition of the system for developing *[729/787]* understanding in the proper way as it has been handed down is completed. So the question, “How should it be developed?” (:ref:`XIV.32 <XIV.32>`) is now answered.

The twenty-second chapter called “The Description of Purification by Knowledge and Vision” in the Treatise on the Development of Understanding in the *Path of Purification* composed for the purpose of gladdening good people.

.. rubric:: Footnotes



.. _XXII.n1:

.. [#1] 
    
    “‘*Of emerging and turning away from the external*\ ’: it is the understanding of turning away that is being effected, which turning away is emergence from the field of formations; it is termed external because the unformed element’s existence is external” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *866*\  ). The unformed element (=Nibbāna) is classed as “external” under the internal (*ajjhattika*\ ) triad of the *Abhidhamma Mātikā*\  (see  [Dhs]_ *2*\   and p. 241).


.. _XXII.n2:

.. [#2] 
    
    *Pakkhandati*\ —“enters into is glossed there by *anupavisati*\  (enters in  [Vism-mhṭ]_ *(p. 566)*\  , which is the sense required and may be taken as based on the idiom in the Suttas, “*Cittaṃ pakkhandati pasīdati santiṭṭhati adhimuccati*\ —the mind enters into [that], becomes settled, steady and resolute” ( [M]_ *I 186*\  ), which is obviously inappropriate here.


.. _XXII.n3:

.. [#3] 
    
    *Phalakasataṃ—*\ “target”: not in PED.  [Vism-mhṭ]_   says “*Phalakasatan ti asana-sāra-mayaṃ phalakasataṃ—*\ a “*phalakasata*\ ” is one made of the heart (pith) of the *asana*\  tree.” The “wheel contrivance” resembles a potter’s wheel according to  [Vism-mhṭ]_ *(p. 867)*\  .


.. _XXII.n4:

.. [#4] 
    
    The seven (noble) treasures are: faith, virtue, conscience, shame, learning, generosity, and understanding ( [D]_ *III 251*\  ).


.. _XXII.n5:

.. [#5] 
    
    See the five kinds of enmity and fear at  [S]_ *II 68f.*\    [Vism-mhṭ]_  , however, says: “The five kinds of enmity beginning with killing living things and the twenty-five great terrors (*mahā-bhayāni*\ ) are what constitute ‘*all enmity and fear*\ ’” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *867*\  ).


.. _XXII.n6:

.. [#6] 
    
    For the use of the expression “brings to bear”—*samodhāneti*\  in this sense see  [Paṭis]_ *I 181*\  .


.. _XXII.n7:

.. [#7] 
    
    “Here ‘*change-of-lineage*\ ’ means ‘like change-of-lineage’; for the knowledge that ushers in the [first] path is called that in the literal sense because it overcomes the ordinary man’s lineage and develops the Noble One’s lineage. But this is called ‘change-of-lineage’ figuratively because of its similarity to the other. It is also called ‘cleansing’ (*vodāna*\ ) because it purifies from certain defilements and because it makes absolute purification its object. Hence it is said in the Paṭṭhāna, ‘Conformity is a condition, as proximity condition, for cleansing’ ( [Paṭṭh]_ *I 59*\  ). But ‘*next to change-of-lineage*\ ’ is said here because it is said in the Paṭisambhidāmagga that for the purpose of ‘overcoming arising,’ etc., ‘eight states of change-of-lineage arise through concentration’ and ‘ten states of change-of-lineage arise through concentration’ and ‘ten states of change-of-lineage arise through insight’ ( [Paṭis]_ *I 68–69*\  ), and it is given in the same way in this page” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *869*\  ).


.. _XXII.n8:

.. [#8] 
    
    The four foundations of mindfulness are fully commented on in the commentary to MN 10 (= commentary to DN 22). The right endeavours are fully commented on in the commentary to the Sammappadhāna Vibhaṅga (cf.  [M-a]_ *II 243*\  ; also A-a commenting on AN 1:II 1). The four roads to power are briefly commented on at  [M-a]_ *II 69*\   and fully in the commentary to the  [M-a]_ *I 82f.*\   and more fully in the commentary to the Bojjhaṅga Vibhaṅga. The Noble Eightfold Path is commented on at  [M-a]_ *I 105*\   and from a different angle in the commentary to the Magga Vibhaṅga. The five faculties and the five powers are not apparently dealt with in the Nikāya and the Abhidhamma Commentaries by adding anything further to what is said here (§37).


.. _XXII.n9:

.. [#9] 
    
    The Paṭisambhidā ( [Paṭis]_ *I 177*\  ) derives *satipaṭṭhāna*\  from *sati*\  (mindfulness) and *paṭṭhāna*\  (foundation, establishment). The commentaries prefer to derive it from *sati* and *upaṭṭhāna*\  (establishment, appearance, and also waiting upon: see  [M-a]_ *I 238*\  ). The readings of the Ee and Ae eds. disagree here and that of the former has been followed though the result is much the same.


.. _XXII.n10:

.. [#10] 
    
    These figures refer to the numbers of different contemplations described in the tenth sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya (= DN 22).


.. _XXII.n11:

.. [#11] 
    
    These three abstinences are the “prior state” of the Eightfold Path (see  [M]_ *III 289*\  ). “Only the road to power consisting in zeal, and right speech, are actually included here; but when these are mentioned, the remaining roads to power and remaining two abstinences are implied in the meaning too. The meaning of this sentence should be understood according to the ‘category of characteristics’ (*lakkhaṇa-hāra*\ —see Nettipakaraṇa)” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *872*\  ). This  [Netti]_   rule says:
    
    “When one thing has been stated, then those things That are in characteristic one with it Are stated too–this is the formulation Of the category of characteristics” ( [Netti]_ *3*\  ).


.. _XXII.n12:

.. [#12] 
    
    “Emergence from the sign consists in relinquishing the sign of formations and making Nibbāna the object. Emergence from occurrence consists in entering upon the state of non-liability to the occurrence of kamma-result in the future by causing the cessation of cause” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *874*\  ).


.. _XXII.n13:

.. [#13] 
    
    “It emerges from the defilements of uncertainty, etc., that occur consequent upon that view, which is wrong since it leads to states of loss” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *874*\  ).


.. _XXII.n14:

.. [#14] 
    
    “‘*Wrong knowledge*\ ,’ which is wrong because it does not occur rightly [i.e. in conformity with the truth], and is wrong and mistaken owing to misinterpretations, etc., is just delusion. ‘*Wrong deliverance*\ ’ is the wrong notion of liberation that assumes liberation to take place in a ‘World Apex’ (*lokathūpika–*\ see :ref:`XVI.85 <XVI.85>`), and so on” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *886*\  ).


.. _XXII.n15:

.. [#15] 
    
    The meaning of this paragraph is made clearer by reference to the *Atthasālinī* ( [Dhs-a]_ *48*\  ) and *Mūla Ṭīkā*\  ( [Dhs-ṭ]_ *51*\  ), where the use of *ā*\  as an adverb in the sense of “as far as” indirectly with the ablative (*gotrabhuto*\ , etc.) is explained; the abl. properly belongs to *savana*\  (i.e. exudations from).  [Vism-mhṭ]_   only says: “‘*Exudations*\ ’ (*savana*\ ) because of occurring [due to], *savanato*\  (“*because of exuding*\ ”) is because of flowing out as filth of defilement. *Savanato*\  (“*because of producing*\ ”) the second time is because of giving out (*pasavana*\ )” (Vism-mhṭ 876. Cf. also  [M-a]_ *I 61*\  ).


.. _XXII.n16:

.. [#16] 
    
    “The intention is: or it follows that there is dissociation of defilements from consciousness, like that of formations according to those who assert that formations exist dissociated form consciousness. He said, ‘there is no such thing as a present defilement dissociated from consciousness’ in order to show that that is merely the opinion of those who make the assertion. For it is when immaterial states are actually occurring by their having a single basis and being included in the three instants that they are present; so how could that be dissociated from consciousness? Consequently there is no dissociation from consciousness here” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *878*\  ).


.. _XXII.n17:

.. [#17] 
    
    “‘*Shackled*\ ’: one whose consciousness is shackled by conceit (pride)” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *878*\  ).


.. _XXII.n18:

.. [#18] 
    
    “‘*In any given plane*\ ’ means aggregates as objects of clinging, reckoned as a human or divine person” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *879*\  ).


.. _XXII.n19:

.. [#19] 
    
    “By the words ‘which are the object of insight’ he points out the non-fully-understood state of the aggregates, not merely the fact that they are the object of insight, which is proved by his taking only the three planes. For it is not-fully-understood aggregates among the aggregates constituting the [subjective] basis that are intended as the ‘soil of defilements’” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *880*\  ).


.. _XXII.n20:

.. [#20] 
    
    “No one would be able to abandon the root of becoming if it were in another’s continuity. ‘*With respect to the basis [for them in oneself*\ ]’ means as the place of their arising; in that particular becoming or continuity” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *880*\  ).


.. _XXII.n21:

.. [#21] 
    
    “‘*With the contact of knowledge by personal experience*\ ’ means by personal experience of it as object, which is what the ‘contact of knowledge’ is called. The words, ‘By personal experience’ exclude taking it as an object by inference. For what is intended here as the ‘contact of knowledge’ is knowing by personal experience through reviewing thus, ‘This is like this’” ( [Vism-mhṭ]_ *888*\  ).


.. _XXII.n22:

.. [#22] 
    
    The first elision here—“The eye … ageing-and-death”—is explained in :ref:`XX.9 <XX.9>`. The second elision—“One who sees suffering … One who sees Nibbāna, which merges in the deathless in the sense of end …”—covers all things listed from  [Paṭis]_ *I 8*\  , line 18 (N.B. the new para in the  [Paṭis]_   text should begin with the words “*dukkhaṃ abhiññeyyaṃ*\ ” up to p. 22, line 11, *amatogadhaṃ nibbānaṃ pariyosānatthaṃ abhiññeyyaṃ*\ ). In this case, however ( [Paṭis]_ *I 35*\  ), *sacchikātabba*\  (“to be realized”), etc., is substituted for *abhiññeyya* (“to be directly known”).
