

(X)=

# X. On distinguishing wisdom



**Q.** What is wisdom? What is its salient characteristic? What is its function? What is its manifestation? What is its near cause? What are its benefits? What is the meaning of wisdom? Through what merits can wisdom be acquired? How many kinds of wisdom are there?

**A.** The seeing, by the mind, of objects as they are—this is called wisdom. [^1] And again, the considering of advantage and non-advantage, and of the sublime, is called wisdom. It is according to the teaching of the Abhidhamma.

## Wisdom defined



What is wisdom? This wisdom (*paññā*) is understanding (*paññā*). This {anchor}`page-BPS1995-230` [{ref}`230 <page-BPS1995-230>`/293]{.pb-tag-BPS}  is knowledge. This is investigation of the truth, distinguishing, [^2] synecdoche. That investigation is learned, skilful, clever, and in considering, it sees clearly and draws knowledge (?). Wisdom is good; wisdom is faculty; wisdom is power; wisdom is sword; wisdom is a tower; wisdom is light; wisdom is splendour; wisdom is a lamp; and wisdom is a gem. Non-delusion, investigation of the truth, right views—these are called wisdom. [^3] The attainment of truth is its salient characteristic. Investigation is its function. Non-delusion is its manifestation. The four truths are its near cause. And again, clear understanding is its salient characteristic; the entering into the true law is its function; the dispelling of the darkness of ignorance is its manifestation; the four kinds of analytical science are its near cause.

## Benefits of wisdom



What are its benefits? Incalculable are the benefits of wisdom. This is the statement in brief:—
:::{line-block}

Through wisdom are all morals made to shine.
Two kinds of wisdom lead to *jhāna*-heights.
Through wisdom does one tread the Holy Path
and see the fruition great of sanctity.
Supreme is wisdom; ’tis the eye of things.
The loss of wisdom is impurity.
Unrivalled is the growth in wisdom’s state.
Through wisdom does one break all heresy.
The vulgar drawn by craving practise ill;
Not so the wise, the highest of all kind,
who rightly live and teach what profits both
this world and that. They being free and strong
see states of woe and welfare multiform,
and know condition, cause, mind, matter, norm.
This wisdom is the doctrine of the Truths.
This wisdom is the pasture of the good.
Through wisdom one attains to excellence.
Through wisdom one roots out the evil brood,
which are called craving, hatred, ignorance,
and birth and death, and all the rest that is,
which naught else ever can exterminate. {anchor}`page-BPS1995-231` [{ref}`231 <page-BPS1995-231>`/294]{.pb-tag-BPS}  
:::


## Meaning of wisdom



**Q.** What is the meaning of wisdom? **A.** It means “knowledge” and it means “removing well”. Through what merits can wisdom be acquired? Through these eleven merits, {anchor}`page-PTS-445` [{ref}`445 <page-PTS-445>`]{.pb-tag-PTS}  namely, searching the meaning of the scriptures, many good deeds, dwelling in purity, serenity and insight, the Four Truths, work of“science (?), calming the mind, dwelling in meditation, *jhāna*, at all times, ridding the mind of the hindrances, separating from the unwise and the habit of associating with the wise.

## Two kinds of wisdom



How many kinds of wisdom are there? **A.** Two kinds, three kinds and four kinds. **Q.** What are the two kinds in wisdom? **A.** Mundane wisdom and supramundane wisdom. [^4] Here wisdom which is associated with the Noble Path and Fruit is supramundane wisdom. Others are mundane wisdom. Mundane wisdom is with cankers, with fetters and with tangle. This is flood. This is yoke. This is hindrance. This is contact. This is faring on. This is contamination. [^5] Supramundane wisdom is without cankers, is without fetters, is without tangle, the non-flood, the non-yoked, the non-hindered, the non-contacted, the not faring on, the non-contaminated.

## Groups of wisdom (various)



### First group of three in wisdom



The three kinds in wisdom are-wisdom sprung from thought, wisdom sprung from study and wisdom sprung from culture. [^6] Here wisdom which one acquires without learning from others is the wisdom that *kamma* is property of each one or the wisdom which is conformable to the truth in respect of vocational works or works of science. Thus is wisdom sprung from thought to be known. The wisdom that is got by learning from others is called wisdom sprung from study. Entering into concentration one develops all wisdom— this is wisdom sprung from concentration.

### Second group of three in wisdom



Again there are three kinds in wisdom: skill in profit, skill in loss, skill {anchor}`page-BPS1995-232` [{ref}`232 <page-BPS1995-232>`/295]{.pb-tag-BPS}  in means. Here as one attends to these states, demeritorious states are put away; meritorious states are made to increase. This wisdom is called skill in profit. Again, as one attends to these states, demeritorious states arise, and meritorious states are put away. This wisdom is called “skill in loss”. Here, the wisdom of all means of success is called “skill in means”. [^7]

### Third group of three in wisdom



And again, there are three kinds in wisdom, namely, the wisdom that accumulates, the wisdom that does not accumulate and the wisdom that neither accumulates nor does not accumulate. The wisdom of the Four Paths is called the wisdom that does not accumulate. The neither describable nor non-describable wisdom of the Fruit of the four stages and the object of three stages—this is wisdom that neither accumulates nor does not accumulate. [^8]

### First group of four in wisdom



The four kinds in wisdom are knowledge produced by one’s own *kamma* knowledge that conforms to the truth, knowledge connected with the Four Paths and knowledge connected with the Four Fruits. Here, right view concerning the ten bases is the knowledge produced by one’s own *kamma*. “Adaptable patience” in one who regards the aggregates as impermanent, ill, and not-self is called knowledge that conforms to the truth. The wisdom of the Four Paths is called knowledge connected with the Four Paths. The wisdom of the Four Fruits is called knowledge connected with the Four Fruits. [^9]

### Second group of four in wisdom



And again, there are four kinds in wisdom, namely, wisdom of the sensuous element, wisdom of the form element, wisdom of the formless element and {anchor}`page-BPS1995-233` [{ref}`233 <page-BPS1995-233>`/296]{.pb-tag-BPS}  the wisdom of the unfettered. Here, meritorious wisdom of the sensuous element which is neither characterizable nor non-characterizable is wisdom of the sensuous element; Meritorious wisdom of the form element which is neither characterizable nor non-characterizable is called wisdom of the form element. Meritorious wisdom of the formless element which is neither characterizable nor non-characterizable is called wisdom of the formless element. Wisdom of the Paths and the Fruits is called unfettered wisdom. [^10]

### Third group of four in wisdom



And again, there are four kinds in wisdom, namely, knowledge of the Law, knowledge of succession, knowledge of discrimination, and general knowledge. The wisdom of the Four Paths and the Four Fruits is called knowledge of the Law. That yogin knows the past, the future and the present through knowledge of the Law, and through this also he knows thé distant past and the distant future. The knowledge of the (four) truths is knowledge of succession. The knowledge of others’ minds is called the knowledge of discrimination. The kinds of knowledge that are other than these three are called general knowledge. [^11]

### Fourth group of four in wisdom



And again there are four kinds in wisdom, namely, wisdom which is due to combination and not due to non-combination; wisdom which is due to non-combination and not to combination; wisdom which is due to combination and also to non-combination; wisdom which is due to neither combination {anchor}`page-BPS1995-234` [{ref}`234 <page-BPS1995-234>`/297]{.pb-tag-BPS}  nor to non-combination. Here meritorious wisdom of the sensuous element is due to combination and not to non-combination. The wisdom of the Four Paths is due to non-combination and not to combination. Meritorious wisdom of the form element and the formless element is due to combination and also to non-combination. Characterizable wisdom of the Fruit of the four stages and of the object of the three stages is neither due to combination nor to non-combination. [^12]

### Fifth group of four in wisdom



And again, there are four kinds in wisdom. There is wisdom which is due to aversion and not to penetration. There is wisdom which is due to penetration and not to aversion. There is wisdom which is due to aversion and also to penetration. There is wisdom which is due neither to aversion nor to penetration. Here the wisdom which is due to aversion and which is not due to penetration of supernormal knowledge and the knowledge of the Four Truths is called wisdom which is due to aversion and not due to penetration. That which is due to supernormal knowledge is due to penetration and not due to aversion. The wisdom of the Four Paths are due to aversion and also to penetration. The other kinds of wisdom are due neither to aversion nor to penetration. [^13]

### Sixth group of four in wisdom



And again, there are four kinds in wisdom, namely, analysis of meaning, of the Law, of interpretation and of argument. Knowledge in regard to meaning is analysis of meaning. Knowledge in regard to doctrine is analysis of the Law. Knowledge in regard to etymological interpretation is analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in regard to knowledge is analysis of argument. [^14]

### Seventh group of four in wisdom



Knowledge in regard to consequence of cause is analysis of meaning. Knowledge in regard to cause is analysis of the Law. Understanding in {anchor}`page-BPS1995-235` [{ref}`235 <page-BPS1995-235>`/298]{.pb-tag-BPS}  regard to the analysis of the Law is analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in regard to knowledge is analysis of argument. [^15]

### Eighth group of four in wisdom



And again, the knowledge of ill and cessation is analysis of meaning. The knowledge of the origin of ill and the Path is called analysis of the Law. Etymological interpretation of the Law is called analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in regard to knowledge is called analysis of argument. [^16]

### Ninth group of four in wisdom



And again, knowledge of the Law, namely, the discourses, mixed verse and prose, expositions, verse, solemn utterances, sayings, birth-stories, supernormal phenomena, divisions according to matter [^17] is called analysis of the Law. One knows the meaning of what is spoken: “This is the meaning of what is spoken”. This is called analysis of meaning. Knowledge of the meaning of what has been preached is called the analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in regard to knowledge is called analysis of argument. [^18]

### Tenth group of four in wisdom



And again, knowledge in respect of the eye is called analysis of the Law. Eye-knowledge in respect of views is called analysis of meaning. Knowledge in interpreting what has been preached is called analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in regard to knowledge is called analysis of argument. [^19]

### Eleventh group of four in wisdom



And again, there are four kinds of knowledge, namely, knowledge of ill, {anchor}`page-BPS1995-236` [{ref}`236 <page-BPS1995-236>`/299]{.pb-tag-BPS}  of the origin of ill, of the ceasing of ill and of the Path. Knowledge in regard to ill is knowledge of ill. Knowledge in regard to the origin of ill is knowledge of the origin of ill. Knowledge in regard to the ceasing of ill is knowledge of the ceasing of ill. Knowledge which practises to completion is knowledge of the Path. [^20]

*The Distinguishing of Wisdom in the Path of Freedom has ended.*

*The Ninth Fascicle has ended.*

{anchor}`page-BPS1995-237` [{ref}`237 <page-BPS1995-237>`/300]{.pb-tag-BPS} 
      

:::{rubric} Footnotes

:::


(X.n1)=

[^1]:
    
    
    
    (p229n1)=
    
    *Yathābhūtañāṇadassana*.—Cp.
    
    {style=lower-alpha}
    1. {term}`S.`  *III, 13*: *Samādhim bhikkhave bhāvetha, samāhito bhikkhave bhikkhu yathābhūtam pajānāti.*
    2. {term}`S.`  *II, 31-2*: *Iti kho bhikkhave avijjūpanisā saṅkhārā,... pe... bhavūpanisā jāti, jātūpanisaṁ dukkhaṁ, dukkhūpanisā saddhā, saddhūpanisaṁ pāmojjaṁ, pāmojjūpanisā piti, pitūpanisā passaddhi, passaddhūpanisaṁ sukhaṁ, sukhūpaniso samādhi, samādhūpanisaṁ yathābhūtañāṇdassanaṁ, yathābhūtañāṇdassanūpanisā nibbidā, nibbidūpaniso virāgo, virāgūpanisā vimutti, vimuttūpanisaṁ khaye ñāṇaṁ.* (= *Tassa kammaṭṭhānaṁ nissāya dubbalā piti uppajjati. Tad assa saddh’ upanisaṁ pāmojjaṁ, taṁ balava-pītiyā paccayo hoti. Balavā pīti daratha-paṭippassaddhiyā paccayo: sā appaṇā-pubbabhāga-sukhassa: taṁ sukhaṁ pādaka-jjhāna-samādhissa: so samādhinā citta-kallataṁ janetvā taruṇavipassanāya kammaṁ karoti. Icc’ assa pādaka-jjhāna-samādhi taruṇa-vipassanāya paccayo hoti: taruṇa-vipassanā balava-vipassanāya: balava-vipassanā maggassa: maggo phalavimuttiyā: phala-vimutti paccavekkhaṇa-ñāṇassā ti.*—{term}`Spk.`  *II, 55-6*).
    3. {term}`A.`  *IV, 336*: *Satisampajaññe bhikkhave asati satisampajaññavipannassa hatupanisaṁ hoti hirottappaṁ, hirottappe asati hirottappavipannassa hatupaniso hoti indriyasaṁvaro, indriyasaṁvare asati indriyasaṁvaravipannassa hatupanisaṁ hoti silaṁ, site asati silavipannassa hatupaniso hoti sammāsamādhi, sammāsamādhimhi asati sammāsamādhi-vipannassa hatupanisaṁ hoti yathābhūtañāṇadassanaṁ, yathābhūtañāṇadassane asati yathābhūtañāṇadassanavipannassa hatupaniso hoti nibbidāvirāgo, nibbidāvirāge asati nibbidāvirāgavipannassa hatupanisaṁ hoti vimuttiñānadassanaṁ.*
    4. {term}`D.`  *II, 313*: *Katamo ca bhikkhave sammā-samādhi?*
    
      *Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu vivicc’ eva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaṁ savicāraṁ vivekajaṁ pīti-sukhaṁ paṭhamajjhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Vitakka-vicārānaṁ vūpasamā ajjhattaṁ sampasādanaṁ cetaso ekodi-bhāvaṁ avitakkaṁ avicāraṁ samādhijaṁ pīti-sukhaṁ dutiyajjhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Pītiyā ca virāgā upekhako viharati sato ca sampajāno, sukhañ ca kāyena paṭisaṁvedeti yan taṁ ariyā ācikkhanti: ‘upekhako satimā sukhavihāri ti’ tatiya-jjhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubb' eva somanassa-domanassānaṁ atthagamā adukkhaṁ asukhaṁ upekhā-sati-pārisuddhiṁ catutthajjhānaṁ upasampajja viharati. Ayaṁ vuccati bhikkhave sammā-samādhi.*
    5. {term}`Vis. Mag.`  *438*: *Kān ‘assā lakkhaṇā-rasa-paccupaṭṭhāna-padaṭṭhānāni ti. Ettha pana dhammasabhāvapaṭivedhalakkhaṇā paññā; dhammānaṁ sabhāvapaṭicchādaka-mohandha-kāraviddhaṁsanarasā; asammohapaccupaṭṭhānā; samāhito yathābhūaṁ jānāti passati ti vacanato pana samādhi tassā padaṭṭhānaṁ.*
    
    
    
    From the foregoing it will be seen that without *samādhi* (= four or any one of the *jhānas*) no development of *paññā* is possible. And it will be noted that this treatise as well as the {term}`Vis. Mag.`, beginning with *sila* and by way of *samādhi* (*jhāna*), come to *paññā* in keeping with the teaching of the seven purifications (*Satta Visuddhi—*{term}`M.`  *I, 149-50*) and of the three trainings (of higher virtue, higher thought and higher wisdom,—*adhisīla-sikkhā, adhicitta-sikkhā, adhipaññā-sikkhā*—{term}`D.`  *III, 219*).

(X.n2)=

[^2]:
    
    Lit. Excellent characteristic.

(X.n3)=

[^3]:
    
    Cp. {term}`Dhs.`  *11, para. 16*: *Yā tasmiṁ samaye paññā pajānanā vicayo pavicayo dhammavicayo sallakkhaṇā upalakkhaṇā paccupalakkhaṇā paṇḍiccaṁ kosallaṁ nepuññaṁ vebhavyā cintā upaparikkhā bhūrī medhā pariṇāyikā vipassanā sampajaññaṁ patodo paññā paññindriyaṁ paññābalaṁ paññāsatthaṁ paññāpāsādo paññā-āloko paññā-obhāso paññāpajjoto paññā-ratanaṁ amoho dhammavicayo sammādiṭṭhi—idaṁ tasmiṁ samaye paññindriyaṁ hoti.*

(X.n4)=

[^4]:
    
    *Lokiya-, lokuttara-paññā.*

(X.n5)=

[^5]:
    
    Cp. {term}`Dhs.`  *125 para. 584*: *Lokiyaṁ sāsavaṁ saṁyojaniyaṁ ganthaniyaṁ oghaniyaṁ, yoganiyaṁ, nivaraṇiyaṁ parāmaṭṭhaṁ upādāniyaṁ saṅkilesikaṁ.*

(X.n6)=

[^6]:
    
    {term}`D.`  *III, 219*: *Cintā-mayā paññā, suta-mayā paññā, bhāvanā-mayā paññā* (=*cintāmay’ ādisu ayaṁ vitthāro. Tattha katamā cintāmayā paññā? Yoga-vihitesu vā kamm’ āyatanesu yoga-vihitesu vā sipp’āyatanesu yoga-vihitesu vā vijjāyatanesu kamma-ssakataṁ vā saccānulomikaṁ vā rūpaṁ aniccan ti vā ...pc... viññāriaṁ aniccan ti vā yaṁ evarūpaṁ anulomikaṁ khantiṁ diṭṭhiṁ ruciṁ muniṁ pekkhaṁ dhamma-nijjhāna-khantiṁ parato asutvā paṭilabhati, ayaṁ vuccati cintāmayā paññā. Yoga-vihitesu vā kamm’ āyatanesu ...pe... dhamma-nijjhāna-khantiṁ parato sutvā paṭilabhati, ayaṁ vuccati sutamayā paññā. Tattha katamā bhāvanāmayā paññā? Sabbā pi sammāpannassa pāññā bhāvanāmayā paññā.*—{term}`Sv.`  *III, 1002*).

(X.n7)=

[^7]:
    
    {term}`D.`  *III, 220*: *Tiṇi kosallāni-Āya-kosallaṁ, apāya-kosallaṁ, upāya-kosallaṁ* (=*Kosallesu āyo ti vaḍḍhi, apāyo ti avaḍḍhi. Tassa tassa kāraṇaṁ upāyo. Tesaṁ pajānanaṁ kosallaṁ. Vitthāro pana Vibhange (325-6) vutto yeva. Vuttaṁ h’ etaṁ: Tattha katamaṁ āya-kossallaṁ? Ime dhamme manasikaroto anuppannā c’ eva akusalā dhammā na uppajjanti, uppannā ca akusalā dhammā nirujjhanti. Ime vā pana me dhamme manasikaroto anup-pannā c’ eva kusalā dhammā uppajjanti, uppannā ca kusalā dhammā bhiyyo-bhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā saṁvattanti. Yā tattha paññā pajānanā sammā-diṭṭhi idaṁ vuccati āya-kosallaṁ. Tattha katamaṁ apāya-kosallaṁ? Ime me dhamme manasi-karoto anuppannā c’ eva akusalā dhammā uppajjanti, uppannā ca kusalā dhammā nirujjhanti. Ime vā pana me dhamme manasikaroto anuppannā c’ eva kusalā dhammā n’uppajjanti, uppannā ca akusalā dhammā bhiyyo-bhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā saṁvattanti. Yā tattha paññā pajānanā sammā-diṭṭhi, idaṁ vuccati apāya-kosallaṁ. Sabbā pi tatr’ upāyā paññā upāya-kosallan ti. Idaṁ pana accāyika-kicce vā bhaye vā uppanne tassa tassa tikicchan’ atthaṁ thān’ uppattiyā kāraṇa-jānana-vasen’ eva veditabbaṁ.*—{term}`Sv.` *III 1005*).

(X.n8)=

[^8]:
    
    Cp. {term}`Vbh.`  *326*: *Tisu bhūmīsu kusale paññā ācayagāmini paññā. Catūsu bhūmisu paññā apacayagāmini paññā. Tisu bhūmīsu kiriyāvyākate paññā neva ācayagāmini na apacayagāmini paññā.*

(X.n9)=

[^9]:
    
    Cp. {term}`Vbh.`  *328*: *Tattha katamaṁ kammassakataṁ ñāṇaṁ? Atthi dinnaṁ atthi yiṭṭhaṁ, atthi hutaṁ, atthi sukaṭadukkaṭānaṁ kammānaṁ phalavipāko, atthi ayaṁ loko, atthi paraloko, atthi mātā, atthi pitā, atthi sattā opapātikā, atthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imaṁ ca lokaṁ parañ ca lokaṁ sayaṁ abhiññā sacchikatvā pavedentīti: yā evarūpā paññā pajānanā …pe... amoho dhammavicayo sammādiṭṭhi: idaṁ vuccati kammassakataṁ ñāṇaṁ. Thapetvā saccānulomikaṁ ñāṇaṁ sabbā pi sāsavā kusalā paññā kammassakataṁ ñāṇaṁ.*
    
    *Tattha katamaṁ saccānulomikaṁ ñāṇaṁ? Rūpaṁ aniccan ti vā vedanā aniccā ti vā saññā aniccā ti vā saṇkhārā aniccā ti vā viññāṇaṁ aniccan ti vā yā evarūpā anulomikā khanti diṭṭhi ruci muti pekkhā dhammanijjhānakhanti: idaṁ vuccati saccānulomikaṁ ñāṇaṁ.*
    :::{line-block}
    
    *Catūsu maggesu paññā maggasamaṁgissa ñāṇaṁ.ṁ*
    *Catūsu phalesu paññā phalasamagissa ñāṇaṁ.*
    :::
    
    
    *Maggasamaṁgissa ñāṇaṁ dukkhe p’ etaṁ ñāṇaṁ...dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya p’ etaṁ ñāṇaṁ*

(X.n10)=

[^10]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *329*: *Kāmāvacarakusalāvyākate paññā kāmāvacarā paññā. Rūpāvacarakusalā- vyākate paññā rūpāvacarā paññā. Arūpāvacarakusalāvyākate paññā arūpāvacarā paññā. Catūsu maggesu ca catūsu phalesu paññā apariyāpannā paññā.*

(X.n11)=

[^11]:
    
    {term}`D.`  *III, 226*: *Cattāri ñāṇāni. Dhamme ñāṇāṁ, anvaye ñāṇāṁ, paricce ñāṇāṁ sammuti-ñāṇāṁ.* (= *Dhamme-ñāṇāṁ ti eka-paṭivedha-vasena catu-sacca-dhamme ñāṇāṁ. Catusacc’ abbhantare nirodha-dhamme ñāṇañ ca. Yath’ āha: “Tattha katamaṁ dhamme ñāṇāṁ? Catusu maggesu, catusu phalesu ñāṇāṁ’’. Anvaye-ñāṇan ti cattāri saccāni paccavekkhato disvā yathā idāni, evaṁ atīte pi anāgate pi: Ime va pañcakkhandhā dukkha-saccaṁ, ayam eva tanhā-samudaya-saccaṁ, ayam eva nirodho nirodha-saccaṁ, ayam eva maggo magga-saccan ti, evaṁ tassa ñāṇassa anugatiyaṁ ñāṇaṁ. Ten’ āha: “So iminā dhammena ñāṇana diṭṭhena pattena viditena pariyogāḷhena atītānāgatena yaṁ neti“ ti. Paricce-ñāṇan ti paresaṁ citta-paricchede ñāṇaṁ. Yath’ āha: “Tattha katamaṁ paricce-ñāṇaṁ? Idha bhikkhu para-sattānaṁ para-puggalānaṁ cetasā ceto-paricca pajānāti” ti vitthāretabbaṁ. Thapetvā pana imāni tīṇi ñāṇāni avasesaṁ sammuti-ñāṇaṁ nāma. Yathāha: “Tattha katamaṁ sammuti-ñāṇaṁ? Thapetvā dhamme-ñāṇaṁ, thapetvā anvaye’ ñāṇaṁ, thapetvā paricce- ñāṇaṁ avasesaṁ sammuti-ñāṇan ti.* —{term}`Sv.`  *III, 1019-20*).

(X.n12)=

[^12]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *330*: *Tattha katamā paññā ācayāya no apacayāya? Kāmāvacarakusale paññā ācayāya no apacayāya. Catūsu maggesu paññā apacayāya no ācayāya. Rūpāvacara- arūpāvacarakusale paññā ācayāya ceva apacayāya ca. Avasesā paññā neva ācayāya no apacayāya.*

(X.n13)=

[^13]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *330*: *Tattha katamā paññā nibbidāya no paṭivedhāya? Yāya paññāya kāmesu vītarāgo hoti, na ca abhiññāyo paṭivijjhati na ca saccāni: ayaṁ vuccati paññā nibbidāya no paṭivedhāya. Sveva paññāya kāmesu vītarāgo samāno abhiññāyo paṭivijjhati, na ca saccāni: ayaṁ vuccati paññā paṭivedhāya no nibbidāya. Catūsu maggesu paññā nibbidāya ceva paṭivedhāya ca. Avasesā paññā neva nibbidāya no paṭivedhāya.*

(X.n14)=

[^14]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *293, 331*: *Tattha katamā catasso paṭisambhidā? Atthapaṭisambhidā dhammapaṭisambhidā niruttipaṭisambhidā paṭibhānapaṭisambhidā. Atthe ñāṇaṁ atthapaṭisambhidā. Dhamme ñāṇaṁ dhammapaṭisambhidā. Tatra dhammaniruttābhilāpe ñāṇaṁ niruttipaṭisambhidā. Nāṇesu ñāṇaṁ paṭibhāṇapaṭisambhidā. Imā catasso paṭisambhidā.*

(X.n15)=

[^15]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *293*: *Hetumhi ñāṇaṁ dhammapaṭisambhidā. Hetuphale ñāṇaṁ atthapaṭisambhidā. Tatra dhammaniruttābhilāpe ñāṇaṁ niruttipaṭisambhidā. Ñāṇesu ñāṇaṁ paṭibhāṇapaṭisambhidā.*

(X.n16)=

[^16]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *293*: *Dukkhe ñāṇaṁ atthapaṭisambhidā. Dukkhasamudayeñāṇaṁ dhammapaṭisambhidā. Dukkhanirodhe ñāṇaṁ atthapaṭisambhidā. Dukkhanirodhagāminiyā paṭipadāya ñāṇaṁ dhammapaṭisambhidā. Tatra dhammaniruttābhilāpe ñāṇaṁ niruttipaṭisambhidā. Ñāṇesu ñāṇaṁ paṭibhāṇapaṭisambhidā.*

(X.n17)=

[^17]:
    
    ∗ *Sutta, geyya, veyyākaraṇa, gāthā, udāna, itivuttaka, jātakā, abbhutadhamma vepulla (vedalla)* —transliteration.

(X.n18)=

[^18]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *294*: *Idha bhikkhu dhammaṁ jānāti suttaṁ geyyaṁ veyyākaraṇaṁ gāthaṁ udānaṁ itivuttakaṁ jātakaṁ abbhutadhammaṁ vedallaṁ: ayaṁ vuccati dhammapaṭisambhidā. So tassa tass' eya bhāsitassa atthaṁ jānāti: ayaṁ imassa bhāsitassa attho, ayaṁ imassa bhāsitassa attho ti: ayaṁ vuccati atthapatisambhidā. Tatra dhammaniruttābhilāpe ñāṇaṁ niruttipaṭisambhidā. Ñāṇesu ñāṇaṁ paṭibhāṇapaṭisambhidā.*

(X.n19)=

[^19]:
    
    {term}`Vbh.`  *296*: *Yasmiṁ samaye akusalaṁ cittaṁ uppannaṁ hoti somanassasahagataṁ diṭṭhigatasampayuttaṁ, rūpārammaṇaṁ vā ...pe... dhammārammaṇaṁ vā yaṁ yaṁ vā pan’ ārabbha, tasmiṁ samaye phasso hoti ...pe ... avikkhepo hoti: ime dhammā akusalā. Imesu dhammesu ñāṇaṁ dhammapaṭisambhidā. Tesaṁ vipāke ñāṇaṁ atthapaṭisambhidā. Yāya niruttiyā tesaṁ dhammānaṁ paññatti hoti, tatra dhammaniruttābhilāpe ñāṇaṁ nirutti paṭisambhidā. Yena ñāṇena tāni ñāṇāni jānāti: imāni ñāṇāni idam atthajotakānīti, ñāṇesu ñāṇaṁ paṭibhāṇa paṭisambhidā.*

(X.n20)=

[^20]:
    
    {term}`D.`  *III, 227*: *Dukkhe ñāṇaṁ, samudaye ñāṇaṁ, nirodhe ñāṇaṁ, magge ñāṇaṁ.*
