<div type="2-chapter" rend="hanging">
  <head>
    <span>Bibliography</span>
  </head>
  <div type="3-section">
    <head>
      <span>Printed Editions of the </span>
      <em>Visuddhimagga</em>
    </head>
    <p>
      <em>Sinhalese script:</em>
      <span> Hewavitarne Bequest edition, Colombo.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Burmese script:</em>
      <span> Hanthawaddy Press edition, Rangoon, 1900.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Siamese script:</em>
      <span> Royal Siamese edition, Bangkok.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Latin script:</em>
      <span> Pali Text Society’s edition, London. Harvard University Press edition, Harvard Oriental Series, Vol. 41, Cambridge, Mass., 1950.</span>
    </p>
  </div>
  <div type="3-section">
    <head>
      <span>Translations of the </span>
      <em>Visuddhimagga</em>
    </head>
    <p>
      <em>English:</em>
      <em> The Path of Purity</em>
      <span> by Pe Maung Tin, PTS, London. 3 vols., 1922–31.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>German:</em>
      <em> Visuddhimagga (der Weg zur Reinheit)</em>
      <span> by Nyanatiloka, Verlag Christiani, Konstanz, 1952. Reprinted by Jhana-Verlag, Uttenbühl, 1997.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Sinhala:</em>
      <em> Visuddhimārga-mahāsannē</em>
      <span>, ed. Ratanapala Medhaṅkara et al, 2 vols., Kalutara, 1949. (Also called </span>
      <em>Parākramabāhu-sannaya</em>
      <span>. A Pali-Sinhala paraphrase composed by King Paṇḍita Parākramabāhu II in the 13th cent. CE.) </span>
      <em>Visuddhimārgaya</em>
      <span>, Sinhala translation by Paṇḍita Mātara Sri Dharmavaṃsa Sthavira, Mātara, 1953. Etc.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>French:</em>
      <em> Le Chemin de la pureté</em>
      <span>, transl. by Christian Maës, Editions Fayard, Paris 2002.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Italian:</em>
      <em> Visuddhimagga: Il sentiero della purificazione</em>
      <span>, transl. of </span>
      <em>samādhi-bheda</em>
      <span> by Antonella Serena Comba, Lulu.com, Raleigh, 2008.</span>
    </p>
  </div>
  <div type="3-section">
    <head>
      <span>Other works</span>
    </head>
    <p>
      <em>Buddhaghosuppatti</em>
      <span>, edited and translated into English, by J. Gray, Luzac and Co., London, 1892.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Critical Pali Dictionary</em>
      <span> (Pali-English), Vol. I (letter </span>
      <em>a</em>
      <span>), Copenhagen, 1924–48.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Cūḷavaṃsa or Minor Chronicle of Ceylon</em>
      <em> (or Mahāvaṃsa Part II)</em>
      <span>, English translation by W. Geiger, PTS London.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Dīpavaṃsa (Chronicle of Ceylon)</em>
      <span>, English translation by H. Oldenberg, London, 1879.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>The Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon</em>
      <span>, by E. W. Adikaram, Sri Lanka, 1946.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Guide through Visuddhimagga</em>
      <span>, U. Dhammaratana, Sarnath, 1964.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>History of Indian Literature</em>
      <span>, by M. Winternitz, English translation by Mrs. S. Ketkar and Miss H. Kohn, Calcutta University, 1933.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>History of Pali Literature</em>
      <span>, by B.C. Law, London, 1933 (2 Vols.).</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>The Life and Work of Buddhaghosa</em>
      <span>, by B.C. Law, Thacker, and Spink, Calcutta and Simla, 1923.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Mahāvaṃsa or Great Chronicle of Ceylon</em>
      <span>, English translation by W. Geiger, PTS, London.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Pali-English Dictionary</em>
      <span>, Pali Text Society, London.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>The Pali Literature of Ceylon</em>
      <span>, by G.P. Malalasekera, Royal Asiatic Society, London, 1928. Reprinted by BPS, Kandy, 1994.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Pali Literature and Language</em>
      <span>, by W. Geiger, English translation by Batakrishna Ghosh, Calcutta University, 1943.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Paramatthamañjūsā</em>
      <span>, Ācariya Dhammapāla, commentary to the </span>
      <em>Visuddhimagga</em>
      <span> (</span>
      <em>Visuddhimaggamahā-ṭīkā</em>
      <span>). Vidyodaya ed. in Sinhalese script, Colombo (Chapters I to XVII only). P.C. Mundyne Pitaka Press ed. in Burmese script, Rangoon, 1909 (Chapters I to XI), 1910 (Chapters XII to XXIII). Siamese ed. in Siamese script, Bangkok. Latin script edition on </span>
      <em>Chaṭṭha Saṅgāyana</em>
      <span> CDROM of Vipassana Research Institute, Igatpuri. No English translation.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Theravada Buddhism in Burma</em>
      <span>, by Niharranjan Ray, Calcutta University, 1946 (pp. 24 ff.).</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Vimuttimagga</em>
      <span>, Chinese translation: </span>
      <em>Jiĕ-tu-dào-lùn</em>
      <span> by Tipiṭaka Saṅghapāla of Funan (6th cent. CE). Taishō edition at T 32, no. 1648, p. 399c–461c (Nanjio no. 1293).</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>The Path of Freedom</em>
      <span> (</span>
      <em>Vimuttimagga</em>
      <span>), privately circulated English translation from the Chinese by N.R.M. Ehara, V.E.P. Pulle and G.S. Prelis. Printed edition, Colombo 1961; reprinted by BPS, Kandy 1995. (Revised, BPS edition forthcoming in 2010.)</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <em>Vimuttimagga and Visuddhimagga—Comparative Study</em>
      <span>, by P.V. Bapat, Poona, 1937. (Reprinted by BPS, 2010)</span>
    </p>
  </div>
  <div type="3-section">
    <head>
      <span>List of abbreviations for texts used</span>
    </head>
    <p>
      <em>All editions Pali Text Society unless otherwise stated.</em>
    </p>
    <bibliography>
      <bibentry abbrev="A">
        <span>Aṅguttara Nikāya</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="A-a">
        <em>Aṅguttara Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā = Manorathapurāṇī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Cp">
        <span>Cariyāpiṭaka</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Cp-a">
        <em>Cariyāpiṭaka Aṭṭhakathā</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhp">
        <span>Dhammapada</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhp-a">
        <em>Dhammapada Aṭṭhakathā</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhs">
        <span>Dhammasaṅgaṇī</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhs-a">
        <em>Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā = Atthasālinī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhs-ṭ">
        <em>Dhammasaṅgaṇī Ṭīkā = Mūla Ṭīkā II</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dhātuk">
        <span>Dhātukathā</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="D">
        <span>Dīgha Nikāya</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="D-a">
        <em>Dīgha Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā = Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Dīp">
        <em>Dīpavaṃsa</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="It">
        <span>Itivuttaka</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="J-a">
        <em>Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Kv">
        <span>Kathāvatthu</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Mhv">
        <em>Mahāvaṃsa</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="M">
        <span>Majjhima Nikāya</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="M-a">
        <em>Majjhima Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā = Papañca-sūdanī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Mil">
        <em>Milindapañhā</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Netti">
        <em>Nettipakaraṇa</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Nidd">
        <span>Niddesa</span>
        <list type="numbered" subtype="I.">
          <item>
            <span>Mahā Niddesa</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Cūḷa Niddesa (Siamese ed.)</span>
          </item>
        </list>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Nikāya-s">
        <em>Nikāyasaṃgrahaya</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Paṭis">
        <span>Paṭisambhidāmagga</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Paṭis-a"><em>Paṭisambhidāmagga Aṭṭhakathā = Saddhammappakāsinī</em>&gt;<span> (Sinhalese Hewavitarne ed.)</span></bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Paṭṭh">
        <span>Paṭṭhāna</span>
        <list type="numbered" subtype="I.">
          <item>
            <span>Paṭṭhāna, Tika Paṭṭhāna</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Paṭṭhāna, Duka Paṭṭhāna (Se and Be.)</span>
          </item>
        </list>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Peṭ">
        <em>Peṭakopadesa</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Pv">
        <span>Petavatthu</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="S">
        <span>Saṃyutta Nikāya</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="S-a">
        <em>Saṃyutta Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā = Sāratthappakāsinī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Sn">
        <span>Sutta-nipāta</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Sn-a">
        <em>Sutta-nipāta Aṭṭhakathā = Paramatthajotikā</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Th">
        <span>Thera-gāthā</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Ud">
        <span>Udāna</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Ud-a">
        <span>???</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vibh">
        <span>Vibhaṅga</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vibh-a">
        <em>Vibhaṅga Aṭṭhakathā = Sammohavinodanī</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vibh-ṭ">
        <em>Vibhaṅga Ṭīkā = Mūla Ṭīkā II</em>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vv">
        <span>Vimānavatthu</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vin">
        <span>Vinaya Piṭaka</span>
        <list type="numbered" subtype="I.">
          <item>
            <span>Vinaya Piṭaka I: (3)—Mahāvagga</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Vinaya Piṭaka II: (4)—Cūḷavagga</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Vinaya Piṭaka III: (1)—Suttavibhaṅga 1</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Vinaya Piṭaka IV: (2)—Suttavibhaṅga 2</span>
          </item>
          <item>
            <span>Vinaya Piṭaka V: (5)—Parivāra</span>
          </item>
        </list>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vin-a">
        <span>???</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vism">
        <em>Visuddhimagga</em>
        <span>(PTS ed. [= Ee] and Harvard Oriental Series ed. [= Ae])</span>
      </bibentry>
      <bibentry abbrev="Vism-mhṭ">
        <span>Paramatthamañjūsā, Visuddhimagga Aṭṭhakathā = Mahā Ṭīkā (Chs. I to XVII Sinhalese Vidyodaya ed.; Chs. XVIII to XXIII Be ed.)</span>
      </bibentry>
    </bibliography>
    <div type="4-subsection">
      <head>
        <span>Other abbreviations</span>
      </head>
      <bibliography>
        <bibentry abbrev="Ae">
          <span>American Edition (= Harvard Oriental Series)</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="Be">
          <span>Burmese Edition</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="Ce">
          <span>Ceylonese Edition</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="CPD">
          <em>Critical Pali Dictionary</em>
          <span>; Treckner</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="Ee">
          <span>European Edition (= PTS)</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="EHBC">
          <em>The Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon</em>
          <span>, E. W. Adikaram.</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="PED">
          <em>Pali-English Dictionary</em>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="PLC">
          <em>Pali Literature of Ceylon</em>
          <span>, Malalasekera.</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="PTS">
          <span>Pali Text Society</span>
        </bibentry>
        <bibentry abbrev="Se">
          <span>Siamese Edition</span>
        </bibentry>
      </bibliography>
    </div>
    <p>
      <span>Numbers in square brackets in the text thus [25] refer to the page numbers of the Pali Text Society's edition of the Pali.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <span>Paragraph numbers on the left correspond to the paragraph numbers of the Harvard edition of the Pali.</span>
    </p>
    <p>
      <span>Chapter and section headings and other numberings have been inserted for clarity.</span>
    </p>
  </div>
</div>
